Vol.:(0123456789)
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-022-01043-x
SN Computer Science
REVIEW ARTICLE
AI‑Based Modeling: Techniques, Applications and Research Issues 
Towards Automation, Intelligent and Smart Systems
Iqbal H. Sarker1,2 
Received: 20 July 2021 / Accepted: 21 January 2022 / Published online: 10 February 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a leading technology of the current age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0 or 4IR), 
with the capability of incorporating human behavior and intelligence into machines or systems. Thus, AI-based modeling 
is the key to build automated, intelligent, and smart systems according to today’s needs. To solve real-world issues, various 
types of AI such as analytical, functional, interactive, textual, and visual AI can be applied to enhance the intelligence and 
capabilities of an application. However, developing an effective AI model is a challenging task due to the dynamic nature 
and variation in real-world problems and data. In this paper, we present a comprehensive view on “AI-based Modeling” with 
the principles and capabilities of potential AI techniques that can play an important role in developing intelligent and smart 
systems in various real-world application areas including business, finance, healthcare, agriculture, smart cities, cyberse-
curity and many more. We also emphasize and highlight the research issues within the scope of our study. Overall, the goal 
of this paper is to provide a broad overview of AI-based modeling that can be used as a reference guide by academics and 
industry people as well as decision-makers in various real-world scenarios and application domains.
Keywords  Artificial intelligence · Machine learning · Data science · Advanced analytics · Intelligent computing · 
Automation · Smart systems · Industry 4.0 applications
Introduction
Nowadays, we live in a technological age, the Fourth Indus-
trial Revolution, known as Industry 4.0 or 4IR [59, 91], 
which envisions fast change in technology, industries, soci-
etal patterns, and processes as a consequence of enhanced 
interconnectivity and smart automation. This revolution 
is impacting almost every industry in every country and 
causing a tremendous change in a non-linear manner at an 
unprecedented rate, with implications for all disciplines, 
industries, and economies. Three key terms Automation, 
i.e., reducing human interaction in operations, Intelligent, 
i.e., ability to extract insights or usable knowledge from 
data, and Smart computing, i.e., self-monitoring, analyz-
ing, and reporting, known as self-awareness, have become 
fundamental criteria in designing today’s applications and 
systems in every sector of our lives since the current world 
is more reliant on technology than ever before. The use of 
modern smart technologies enables making smarter, faster 
decisions regarding the business process, ultimately increas-
ing the productivity and profitability of the overall opera-
tion, where Artificial Intelligence (AI) is known as a leading 
technology in the area. The AI revolution, like earlier indus-
trial revolutions that launched massive economic activity in 
manufacturing, commerce, transportation, and other areas, 
has the potential to lead the way of progress. As a result, the 
impact of AI on the fourth industrial revolution motivates 
us to focus briefly on “AI-based modeling” in this paper.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer 
science concerned with building smart machines capable of 
performing tasks that typically require human intelligence. 
In other words, we can say that it aims is to make computers 
This article is part of the topical collection “Advances in 
Computational Approaches for Artificial Intelligence, Image 
Processing, IoT and Cloud Applications” guest-edited by Bhanu 
Prakash K N and M. Shivakumar.
 *	 Iqbal H. Sarker 
	
msarker@swin.edu.au
1	
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, 
Australia
2	
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Chittagong University of Engineering & Technology, 
Chittagong 4349, Bangladesh

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 2 of 20
SN Computer Science
smart and intelligent by giving them the ability to think and 
learn using computer programs or machines, i.e., can think 
and function in the same way that people do. From a philo-
sophical perspective, AI has the potential to help people 
live more meaningful lives without having to work as hard, 
as well as manage the massive network of interconnected 
individuals, businesses, states, and nations in a way that 
benefits everyone. Thus, the primary goal of AI is to enable 
computers and machines to perform cognitive functions 
such as problem-solving, decision making, perception, and 
comprehension of human communication. Therefore, AI-
based modeling is the key to building automated, intelligent 
and smart systems according to today’s needs, which has 
emerged as the next major technological milestone, influenc-
ing the future of practically every business by making every 
process better, faster, and more precise.
While today’s Fourth Industrial Revolution is typically 
focusing on technology-driven “automation, intelligent and 
smart systems”, AI technology has become one of the core 
technologies to achieve the goal. However, developing an 
effective AI model is a challenging task due to the dynamic 
nature and variation in real-world problems and data. Thus, 
we take into account several AI categories: The first one is 
“Analytical AI” with the capability of extracting insights 
from data to ultimately produce recommendations and thus 
contributing to data-driven decision-making; the Second one 
is “Functional AI” which is similar to analytical AI; how-
ever, instead of giving recommendations, it takes actions; 
the Third one is “Interactive AI” that typically allows busi-
nesses to automate communication without compromising 
on interactivity like smart personal assistants or chatbots; 
the Fourth one is “Textual AI” that covers textual analytics 
or natural language processing through which business can 
enjoy text recognition, speech-to-text conversion, machine 
translation, and content generation capabilities; and finally 
the Fifth one is “Visual AI” that covers computer vision or 
augmented reality fields, discussed briefly in “Why artificial 
intelligence in today’s research and applications?”.
Although the area of “artificial intelligence” is huge, we 
mainly focus on potential techniques towards solving real-
world issues, where the results are used to build automated, 
intelligent, and smart systems in various application areas. 
To build AI-based models, we classify various AI tech-
niques into ten categories: (1) machine learning; (2) neural 
networks and deep learning; (3) data mining, knowledge 
discovery and advanced analytics; (4) rule-based modeling 
and decision-making; (5) fuzzy logic-based approach; (6) 
knowledge representation, uncertainty reasoning, and expert 
system modeling; (7) case-based reasoning; (8) text min-
ing and natural language processing; (9) visual analytics, 
computer vision and pattern recognition; (10) hybridization, 
searching and Optimization. These techniques can play an 
important role in developing intelligent and smart systems in 
various real-world application areas that include business, 
finance, healthcare, agriculture, smart cities, cybersecurity, 
and many more, depending on the nature of the problem 
and target solution. Thus, it is important to comprehend the 
concepts of these techniques mentioned above, as well as 
their relevance in a variety of real-world scenarios, discussed 
briefly in “Potential AI techniques”.
Based on the importance and capabilities of AI tech-
niques, in this paper, we give a comprehensive view on 
“AI-based modeling” that can play a key role towards auto-
mation, intelligent and smart systems according to today’s 
needs. Thus, the key focus is to explain the principles of 
various AI techniques and their applicability to the advance-
ment of computing and decision-making to meet the require-
ments of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Therefore the 
purpose of this paper is to provide a fundamental guide 
for those academics and industry professionals who want 
to study, research, and develop automated, intelligent, and 
smart systems based on artificial intelligence techniques in 
relevant application domains.
The main contributions of this paper are therefore listed 
as follows:
•	 To define the scope of our study in terms of automation, 
intelligent and smart computing, and decision-making in 
the context of today’s real-world needs.
•	 To explore various types of AI that includes analytical, 
functional, interactive, textual, and visual AI, to under-
stand the theme of the power of artificial intelligence in 
computing and decision-making while solving various 
problems in today’s Fourth Industrial Revolution.
•	 To provide a comprehensive view on AI techniques that 
can be applied to build an AI-based model to enhance the 
intelligence and capabilities of a real-world application.
•	 To discuss the applicability of AI-based solutions in vari-
ous real-world application domains to assist developers 
as well as researchers in broadening their perspectives on 
AI techniques.
•	 To highlight and summarize the potential research issues 
within the scope of our study for conducting future 
research, system development and improvement.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next sec-
tion provides a background highlighting why artificial intel-
ligence is in today’s research and application. In the subse-
quent section, we discuss and summarize how various AI 
techniques can be used for intelligence modeling in various 
application areas. Next, we summarize various real-world 
application areas, where AI techniques can be employed to 
build automated, intelligent, and smart systems. The impact 
and future aspect of AI highlighting research issues have 
been presented in the penultimate section, and the final sec-
tion concludes this paper.

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 3 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
Why Artificial Intelligence in Today’s 
Research and Applications?
In this section, our goal is to motivate the study of vari-
ous AI techniques that can be applied in various application 
areas in today’s interconnected world. For this, we explore 
Industry 4.0 and the revolution of AI, types of AI techniques, 
as well as the relation with the most prominent machine and 
deep learning techniques. Hence, the scope of our study in 
terms of research and applications is also explored through 
our discussion.
Industry 4.0 and the Revolution of AI
We are now in the age of the 4th Industrial Revolution, 
referred to as Industry 4.0 [59, 91], which represents a new 
era of innovation in technology, particularly, AI-driven 
technology. After the Internet and mobile Internet sparked 
the 3rd Industrial Revolution, AI technologies, fueled by 
data, are now creating an atmosphere of Industry 4.0. The 
term “Industry 4.0” typically refers to the present trend of 
leveraging modern technology to automate processes and 
exchange information. In a broad sense, Industry 4.0 has 
been defined as “A term used to describe the present trend of 
industrial technology automation and data exchange, which 
includes cyber-physical systems, the Internet of Things, 
cloud computing, and cognitive computing, as well as the 
development of the smart factory”. The digital revolution 
to Industry 4.0 begins with data collection, followed by 
artificial intelligence to interpret the data. Thus, the term 
“Intelligence Revolution” can be considered in the context 
of computing and services as the world is being reshaped by 
AI that incorporates human behavior and intelligence into 
machines or systems.
AI is the buzzword these days as it is going to impact 
businesses of all shapes and sizes, across all industries. 
Existing products or services can be enhanced by indus-
trial AI to make them more effective, reliable, and safe. For 
example, computer vision is used in the automotive industry 
to avoid collisions and allow vehicles to stay in their lane, 
making driving safer. The world’s most powerful nations are 
hurrying to jump on the AI bandwagon and are increasing 
their investments in the field. Similarly, the largest and most 
powerful corporations are working hard to build ground-
breaking AI solutions that will put them ahead of the compe-
tition. As a result, its impact may be observed in practically 
every area including homes, businesses, hospitals, cities, and 
the virtual world, as summarized in “Real-World Applica-
tions of AI”.
Understanding Various Types of Artificial 
Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is primarily concerned with com-
prehending and carrying out intelligent tasks such as think-
ing, acquiring new abilities, and adapting to new contexts 
and challenges. AI is thus considered a branch of science 
and engineering that focuses on simulating a wide range of 
issues and functions in the field of human intellect. How-
ever, due to the dynamic nature and diversity of real-world 
situations and data, building an effective AI model is a chal-
lenging task. Thus, to solve various issues in today’s Fourth 
Industrial Revolution, we explore various types of AI that 
include analytical, functional, interactive, textual, and visual, 
to understand the theme of the power of AI, as shown in 
Fig. 1. In the following, we define the scope of each category 
in terms of computing and real-world services.
•	 Analytical AI: Analytics typically refers to the process of 
identifying, interpreting, and communicating meaningful 
patterns of data. Thus, Analytical AI aims to discover 
new insights, patterns, and relationships or dependen-
cies in data and to assist in data-driven decision-making. 
Therefore, in the domain of today’s business intelligence, 
it becomes a core part of AI that can provide insights to 
an enterprise and generate suggestions or recommenda-
tions through its analytical processing capability. Various 
machine learning [81] and deep learning [80] techniques 
can be used to build an analytical AI model to solve a 
particular real-world problem. For instance, to assess 
business risk, a data-driven analytical model can be used.
•	 Functional AI: Functional AI works similarly to ana-
lytical AI because it also explores massive quantities of 
data for patterns and dependencies. Functional AI, on the 
other hand, executes actions rather than making recom-
mendations. For instance, a functional AI model could be 
Fig. 1   Various types of artificial 
intelligence (AI) considering 
the variations of real-world 
issues

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 4 of 20
SN Computer Science
useful in robotics and IoT applications to take immediate 
actions.
•	 Interactive AI: Interactive AI typically enables efficient 
and interactive communication automation, which is well 
established in many aspects of our daily lives, particu-
larly in the commercial sphere. For instance, to build 
chatbots and smart personal assistants an interactive AI 
model could be useful. While building an interactive AI 
model, a variety of techniques such as machine learning, 
frequent pattern mining, reasoning, AI heuristic search 
can be employed.
•	 Textual AI: Textual AI typically covers textual analytics 
or natural language processing through which businesses 
can enjoy text recognition, speech-to-text conversion, 
machine translation as well as content generation capa-
bilities. For instance, an enterprise may use textual AI 
to support an internal corporate knowledge repository 
to provide relevant services, e.g., answering consumers’ 
queries.
•	 Visual AI: Visual AI is typically capable to recognize, 
classify, and sorting items, as well as converting images 
and videos into insights. Thus, visual AI can be consid-
ered as a branch of computer science that trains machines 
to learn images and visual data in the same manner that 
humans do. This sort of AI is often used in fields such as 
computer vision and augmented reality.
As discussed above, each of the AI types has the potential 
to provide solutions to various real-world problems. How-
ever, to provide solutions by taking into account the target 
applications, various AI techniques and their combinations 
that include machine learning, deep learning, advanced ana-
lytics, knowledge discovery, reasoning, searching, and rel-
evant others can be used, discussed briefly in “Potential AI 
techniques”. As most of the real-world issues need advanced 
analytics [79] to provide an intelligent and smart solution 
according to today’s needs, analytical AI that uses machine 
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques can play 
a key role in the area of AI-powered computing and system.
The Relation of AI with ML and DL
Artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and 
deep learning (DL) are three prominent terminologies 
used interchangeably nowadays to represent intelligent 
systems or software. The position of machine learning 
and deep learning within the artificial intelligence field 
is depicted in Fig. 2. According to Fig. 2, DL is a subset 
of ML which is also a subset of AI. In general, AI [77] 
combines human behavior and intelligence into machines 
or systems, whereas ML is a way of learning from data or 
experience [81], which automates analytical model build-
ing. Deep learning [80] also refers to data-driven learning 
approaches that use multi-layer neural networks and pro-
cessing to compute. In the deep learning approach, the 
term “Deep” refers to the concept of numerous levels or 
stages through which data is processed to develop a data-
driven model.
Thus, both ML and DL can be considered as essen-
tial AI technologies, as well as a frontier for AI that can 
be used to develop intelligent systems and automate pro-
cesses. It also takes AI to a new level, termed “Smarter 
AI” with data-driven learning. There is a significant rela-
tionship with “Data Science” [79] as well because both 
ML and DL can learn from data. These learning methods 
can also play a crucial role in advanced analytics and intel-
ligent decision-making in data science, which typically 
refers to the complete process of extracting insights in data 
in a certain problem domain. Overall, we can conclude that 
both ML and DL technologies have the potential to trans-
form the current world, particularly in terms of a powerful 
computational engine, and to contribute to technology-
driven automation, smart and intelligent systems. In addi-
tion to these learning techniques, several others can play 
the role in the development of AI-based models in various 
real-world application areas, depending on the nature of 
the problem and the target solution, discussed briefly in 
“ Potential AI techniques”.
Potential AI Techniques
In this section, we briefly discuss the principles and capabili-
ties of potential AI techniques that can be used in developing 
intelligent and smart systems in various real-world applica-
tion areas. For this we divide AI techniques into ten poten-
tial categories by taking into account various types of AI, 
mentioned in earlier “Why artificial intelligence in today’s 
research and applications?”. Followings are the ten catego-
ries of AI techniques that can play a key role in automation, 
Fig. 2   An illustration of the position of machine learning (ML) and 
deep Learning (DL) within the area of artificial intelligence (AI)

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 5 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
intelligent, and smart computer systems, depending on the 
nature of the problem.
Machine Learning
Machine learning (ML) is known as one of the most promis-
ing AI technologies, which is typically the study of computer 
algorithms that automate analytical model building [81]. ML 
models are often made up of a set of rules, procedures, or 
sophisticated “transfer functions” that can be used to dis-
cover interesting data patterns or anticipate behavior [23]. 
Machine learning is also known as predictive analytics that 
makes predictions about certain unknowns in the future 
through the use of data and is used to solve many real-world 
business issues, e.g., business risk prediction. In Fig. 3, a 
general framework of a machine learning-based predictive 
model is depicted, where the model is trained from histori-
cal data in phase 1 and the outcome is generated for new 
test data in phase 2. For modeling in a particular problem 
domain, different types of machine learning techniques can 
be used according to their learning principles and capabili-
ties, as discussed below.
•	 Supervised learning This is performed when particular 
goals are specified to be achieved from a set of inputs, 
i.e., a ‘task-driven strategy’ that uses labeled data to 
train algorithms to classify data or forecast outcomes, 
for example—detecting spam-like emails. The two most 
common supervised learning tasks are classification 
(predicting a label) and regression (predicting a quan-
tity) analysis, discussed briefly in our earlier paper Sarker 
et al. [81]. Navies Bayes [42], K-nearest neighbors [4], 
Support vector machines [46], Decision Trees - ID3 [71], 
C4.5 [72], CART [15], BehavDT [84], IntrudTree [82], 
Ensemble learning, Random Forest [14], Linear regres-
sion [36], Support vector regression [46], etc. [81] are 
the popular techniques that can be used to solve various 
supervised learning tasks, according to the nature of the 
given data in a particular problem domain. For instance, 
to detect various types of cyber-attacks the classification 
models could be useful, while cyber-crime trend analysis 
or estimating the financial loss in the domain of cyberse-
curity, a regression model could be useful, which enables 
enterprises to assess and manage their cyber-risk.
•	 Unsupervised learning This is referred to as a ‘data-
driven method’, in which the primary goal is to uncover 
patterns, structures, or knowledge from unlabeled data. 
Clustering, visualization, dimensionality reduction, find-
ing association rules, and anomaly detection are some of 
the most common unsupervised tasks, discussed briefly 
in our earlier paper Sarker et al. [81]. The popular tech-
niques for solving unsupervised learning tasks are clus-
tering algorithms such as K-means [55], K-Mediods [64], 
CLARA [45], DBSCAN [27], hierarchical clustering, 
single linkage [92] or complete linkage [93], BOTS [86], 
association learning algorithms such as AIS [2], Apriori 
[3], Apriori-TID and Apriori-Hybrid [3], FP-Tree [37], 
and RARM [18], Eclat [105], ABC-RuleMiner [88] as 
well as feature selection and extracting techniques like 
Pearson Correlation [81], principal component analysis 
[40, 66], etc. that can be used to solve various unsuper-
vised learning-related tasks, according to the nature of 
the data. An unsupervised clustering model, for example, 
could be useful in customer segmentation or identifying 
different consumer groups around which to build market-
ing or other business strategies.
•	 Other learning techniques In addition to particular super-
vised and unsupervised tasks, semi-supervised learning 
can be regarded as a hybridization of both techniques 
explained above, as it uses both labeled and unlabeled 
data to train a model. It could be effective for improv-
ing model performance when data must be labeled 
automatically without human interaction. For instance, 
classifying Internet content or texts, a semi-supervised 
learning model could be useful. Reinforcement learn-
ing is another type of machine learning training strategy 
that rewards desired behaviors while punishing unwanted 
ones. A reinforcement learning agent, in general, is capa-
ble of perceiving and interpreting its surroundings, tak-
ing actions, and learning through trial and error, i.e., an 
environment-driven approach, in which the environment 
is typically modeled as a Markov decision process and 
decisions are made using a reward function [10]. Monte 
Carlo learning, Q-learning, Deep Q Networks, are the 
most common reinforcement learning algorithms [43]. 
Trajectory optimization, motion planning, dynamic path-
ing, and scenario-based learning policies for highways 
are some of the autonomous driving activities where 
reinforcement learning could be used.
Fig. 3   A general structure of a machine learning based predictive 
model considering both the training and testing phase

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 6 of 20
SN Computer Science
Overall, machine learning modeling [81] has been employed 
in practically every aspect of our lives, including health-
care, cybersecurity, business, education, virtual assistance, 
recommendation systems, smart cities, and many more. 
Blumenstock et al. [12], for example, provides a machine 
learning strategy for getting COVID-19 assistance to peo-
ple who need it the most. Sarker et al. highlight numerous 
sorts of cyber anomalies and attacks that can be detected 
using machine learning approaches in the domain of cyber-
security [78, 89]. Saharan et al. [76] describe a machine-
learning-based strategy to develop an effective smart parking 
pricing system for smart city environments. In our earlier 
paper, Sarker et al. [81] we briefly discussed various types 
of machine learning techniques including clustering, feature 
learning, classification, regression, association analysis, etc. 
highlighting their working principles, learning capabilities, 
and real-world applications. In Table 1, we have outlined the 
above-mentioned machine learning techniques, emphasiz-
ing model building procedures and tasks. Overall, machine 
learning algorithms can build a model based on training data 
of a particular problem domain, to make predictions or deci-
sions without having to be explicitly programmed to do so. 
Thus, we can conclude that machine learning approaches can 
play a crucial part in the development of useful models in 
a variety of application areas, based on their learning capa-
bilities and the nature of the data, and the desired outcome.
Neural Networks and Deep Learning
Deep learning (DL) [80] is known as another popular AI 
technique, which is based on artificial neural networks 
(ANN). Nowadays, DL has become a hot topic in the 
computing world due to its layer-wise learning capabil-
ity from data. Multiple hidden layers, including input and 
output layers, make up a typical deep neural network. Fig-
ure 4 shows a general structure of a deep neural network 
( hidden layer = N and N ≥ 2) comparing with a shallow 
network ( hidden layer = 1 ). DL techniques can be divided 
into three major categories, highlighted in our earlier paper 
Sarker et al. [80]. These are as below:
•	 Deep networks for supervised or discriminative learning 
In supervised or classification applications, this type of 
DL approach is used to provide a discriminative function. 
Discriminative deep architectures are often designed to 
provide pattern categorization discrimination by charac-
terizing the posterior distributions of classes conditioned 
on observable data [20]. Multi-layer perceptron (MLP) 
[67], Convolutional neural networks (CNN or ConvNet) 
[53], Recurrent neural networks (RNN) [24, 57], and 
their variants can be used to build the deep discriminative 
learning models to solve the relevant real-world issues.
•	 Deep networks for unsupervised or generative learn-
ing This category of deep learning approaches is com-
monly used to identify high-order correlation qualities 
or features for pattern analysis or synthesis, as well as 
Table 1   Various types of 
machine learning techniques 
with examples
Learning type
Model building
Tasks
Supervised
Algorithms or models learn from labeled data
(Task-Driven Approach)
Classification,
Regression
Unsupervised
Algorithms or models learn from unlabeled data
(Data-Driven Approach)
Clustering,
Associations,
Dimensionality Reduction
Semi-supervised
Models are built using combined data
(Labeled + Unlabeled)
Classification,
Clustering
Reinforcement
Models are based on reward or penalty
(Environment-Driven Approach)
Classification,
Control
Fig. 4   A general architecture of 
a a shallow network with one 
hidden layer and b a deep neural 
network with multiple hidden 
layers

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 7 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
the joint statistical distributions of visible data and their 
associated classes [20]. The key notion of generative 
deep architectures is that specific supervisory informa-
tion, such as target class labels, is unimportant through-
out the learning process. Techniques in this category are 
mostly employed for unsupervised learning, as they are 
commonly used for feature learning or data generation 
and representation [19, 20]. Thus, generative modeling 
can also be utilized as a preprocessing step for super-
vised learning tasks, ensuring discriminative model accu-
racy. The Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [32], 
Autoencoder (AE) [31], Restricted Boltzmann Machine 
(RBM) [58], Self-Organizing Map (SOM) [50], and 
Deep Belief Network (DBN) [39], as well as their vari-
ants, can be used to build the deep generative learning 
models to solve the relevant real-world issues.
•	 Deep networks for hybrid learning Generative models are 
versatile, learning from both labeled and unlabeled data. 
In contrast, discriminative models are unable to learn 
from unlabeled data yet outperform their generative ver-
sions in supervised tasks. Hybrid networks are motivated 
by a paradigm for simultaneously training deep genera-
tive and discriminative models. Multiple (two or more) 
deep basic learning models make up hybrid deep learning 
models, with the basic model being the discriminative or 
generative deep learning model outlined previously. For 
instance, a generative model followed by a discriminative 
model, or an integration of a generative or discriminative 
model followed by a non-deep learning classifier, may be 
effective for tackling real-world problems.
Figure 5 shows a taxonomy of these DL techniques that can 
be employed in many application areas including health-
care, cybersecurity, business, virtual help, smart cities, 
visual analytics, and many more. For example, Aslan et al. 
[9] offer a CNN-based transfer learning strategy for COVID-
19 infection detection. Islam et al. [41] describes a com-
bined deep CNN-LSTM network for the identification of 
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) using X-ray images. Using 
transferable generative adversarial networks built on deep 
autoencoders, Kim et al. [48] propose a method for detect-
ing zero-day malware. Anuradha et al. [8] propose a deep 
CNN-based stock trend prediction utilizing a reinforcement-
LSTM model based on large data. Wang et al. [100] offer a 
real-time collision prediction technique for intelligent trans-
portation systems based on deep learning. Dhyani et al. [22] 
proposed an intelligent Chatbot utilizing deep learning with 
Bidirectional RNN and attention model. Overall, deep learn-
ing approaches can play a crucial role in the development of 
effective AI models in a variety of application areas, based 
on their learning capabilities and the nature of the data, and 
the target outcome.
Fig. 5   A taxonomy of DL techniques [80], broadly divided into three major categories (1) deep networks for supervised or discriminative learn-
ing, (2) deep networks for unsupervised or generative learning, and (3) deep networks for hybrid learning and relevant others

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 8 of 20
SN Computer Science
Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery and Advanced 
Analytics
Over the last decade, data mining has been a common word 
that is interchangeable with terms like knowledge mining 
from data, knowledge extraction, knowledge discovery from 
data (KDD), data or pattern analysis, etc. [79]. Figure 6 
shows a general procedure of the knowledge discovery pro-
cess. According to Han et al. [36], the term “knowledge min-
ing from data” should have been used instead. Data mining 
is described as the process of extracting useful patterns and 
knowledge from huge volumes of data [36], which is related 
to another popular term “Data Science” [79]. Data science 
is typically defined as a concept that unites statistics, data 
analysis, and related methodologies to analyze and investi-
gate realities through data.
In the area of data analytics, several key questions such 
as “What happened?”, “Why did it happen?”, “What will 
happen in the future?”, “What action should be taken?” are 
common and important [79]. Based on these questions, four 
types of analytics such as descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, 
and prescriptive analytics are highlighted below, which can 
be used to build the corresponding data-driven models.
•	 Descriptive analytics It is the analysis of historical data 
to have a better understanding of how a business has 
changed. Thus, descriptive analytics answers the ques-
tion, “What happened in the past?” by describing histori-
cal data such as sales and operations statistics, marketing 
tactics, social media usage, etc.
•	 Diagnostic analytics It is a type of sophisticated analyt-
ics that explores data or content to figure out “Why did it 
happen?” The purpose of diagnostic analytics is to assist 
in the discovery of the problem’s root cause.
•	 Predictive analytics This type of advanced analytics 
typically explores data to answer the question, “What 
will happen in the future?” Thus, the primary purpose 
of predictive analytics is to identify and, in most cases, 
answer this question with a high degree of confidence.
•	 Prescriptive analytics This focuses on advising the 
optimal course of action based on data to maximize the 
total outcomes and profitability, answering the question, 
“What action should be taken?”
To summarize, both descriptive and diagnostic analyt-
ics examine the past to determine what happened and 
why it happened. Predictive and prescriptive analytics 
employ historical data to foresee what will happen in 
the future and what actions should be made to mitigate 
such impacts. For a clear understanding, Table 2 shows 
a summary of these analytics that are applied in various 
application areas. For example, Hamed et al. [35] build 
decision support systems in Arabic higher education 
institutions using data mining and business intelligence. 
Fig. 6   A general procedure 
of the knowledge discovery 
process
Table 2   Various types of analytical methods with examples
Analytical methods
Data-driven model building
Examples
Descriptive Analytics
Answer the question,
“what happened in the past”?
Summarising past events, e.g.,
sales, business data, social media usage,
reporting general trends, etc.
Diagnostic Analytics
Answer the question,
“why did it happen?”
Identify anomalies and determine casual relationships,
to find out business loss,
identifying the influence of medications, etc.
Predictive Analytics
Answer the question,
“what will happen in the future?”
Predicting customer preferences,
recommending products,
identifying possible security breaches,
predicting staff and resource needs, etc.
Prescriptive Analytics
Answer the question,
“what action should be taken?”
 Improving business management, maintenance,
improving patient care and healthcare administration,
determining optimal marketing strategies, etc.

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 9 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
Alazab et al. [5] provide a data mining strategy to maxi-
mize the competitive advantage on E-business websites. 
From logs to stories, Afzaliseresht et al. [1] provide 
human-centered data mining for cyber threat information. 
Poort et al. [70] have described an automated diagnostic 
analytics workflow for the detection of production events-
application to mature gas fields. Srinivas et al. [94] pro-
vide a prescriptive analytics framework for optimizing 
outpatient appointment systems using machine learning 
algorithms and scheduling rules. Thus, we can conclude 
data mining and analytics can play a crucial part to build 
AI models through the extracted insights from the data.
Rule‑Based Modeling and Decision‑Making
Typically, a rule-based system is used to store and modify 
knowledge to understand data in a meaningful way. A rule 
base is a sort of knowledge base that has a list of rules. 
In most cases, rules are written as IF-THEN statements 
of the form:
IF < antecedent > THEN < consequent >
Such an IF-THEN rule-based expert system model can 
have the decision-making ability of a human expert in 
an intelligent system designed to solve complex prob-
lems and knowledge reasoning [85]. The reason is that 
the rules in professional frameworks are easily under-
stood by humans and are capable of representing relevant 
knowledge clearly and effectively. Furthermore, rule-
based models may be quickly improved according to the 
demands by adding, deleting, or updating rules based 
on domain expert information, or recency, i.e. based on 
recent trends [83].
Previously, the term “rule-based system” was used to 
describe systems that used rule sets that were handcrafted 
or created by humans. However, rule-based machine 
learning approaches could be more effective in terms of 
automation and intelligence, which include mainly clas-
sification and association rule learning techniques [85]. 
Several popular classification techniques such as deci-
sion trees [72], IntrudTree [82], BehavDT [84], Ripple 
Down Rule learner (RIDOR) [101], Repeated Incremen-
tal Pruning to Produce Error Reduction (RIPPER) [102], 
etc. exist with the ability of rule generation. Based on 
support and confidence value, association rules are built 
by searching for frequent IF-THEN pattern data. Com-
mon association rule learning techniques such as AIS 
[2], Apriori [3], FP-Tree [37], RARM [18], Eclat [105], 
ABC-RuleMiner [88], and others can be used to build 
a rule-based model utilizing a given data set. Sarker 
et al. [88], for example, provide a rule-based machine 
learning strategy for context-aware intelligent and adap-
tive mobile services. Borah et al. [13] propose a method 
for employing dynamic rare association rule mining to 
find risk variables for unfavorable illnesses. Using case-
based clustering and weighted association rule mining, 
Bhavithra et al. [11] offer a personalized web page sug-
gestion. Xu et al. [103] introduced a risk prediction and 
early warning system for air traffic controllers’ risky 
behaviors utilizing association rule mining and random 
forest. Thus, we can conclude that rule-based modeling 
can play a significant role to build AI models as well as 
intelligent decision-making in various application areas 
to solve real-world issues.
Fuzzy Logic‑Based Approach
Fuzzy logic is a precise logic of imprecision and approxi-
mate reasoning [104]. This is a natural generalization of 
standard logic in which a concept’s degree of truth, also 
known as membership value or degree of membership, can 
range from 0.0 to 1.0. Standard logic only applies to con-
cepts that are either completely true, i.e., degree of truth 1.0, 
or completely false, i.e., degree of truth 0.0. Fuzzy logic, 
on the other hand, has been used to deal with the concept 
of partial truth, in which the truth value may range from 
completely true to completely false, such as 0.9 or 0.5. For 
instance, “if x is very large, do y; if x is not very large, do 
z”. Here the boundaries of very big and not too big may 
overlap, i.e. fuzzy. As a result, fuzzy logic-based models can 
recognize, represent, manipulate, understand, and use data 
and information that are vague and uncertain [104]. Figure 7 
shows a general architecture of a fuzzy logic system. It typi-
cally has four parts as below:
•	 Fuzzification It transforms inputs, i.e. crisp numbers into 
fuzzy sets.
Fig. 7   A general architecture of fuzzy logic systems

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 10 of 20
SN Computer Science
•	 Knowledge-base It contains the set of rules and the IF-
THEN conditions provided by the experts to govern the 
decision-making system, based on linguistic information.
•	 Inference engine It determines the matching degree of 
the current fuzzy input concerning each rule and decides 
which rules are to be fired according to the input field. 
Next, the fired rules are combined to form the control 
actions.
•	 Defuzzification It transforms the fuzzy sets obtained by 
the inference engine into a crisp value.
Although machine learning models are capable of differen-
tiating between two (or more) object classes based on their 
ability to learn from data, the fuzzy logic approach is pre-
ferred when distinguishing features are vaguely defined and 
rely on human expertise and knowledge. Thus, the system 
may work with any type of input data, including imprecise, 
distorted, or noisy data, as well as with limited data. It is a 
suitable strategy to use in scenarios with real, continuous-
valued elements because it uses data acquired in surround-
ings with such properties [34]. Fuzzy logic-based models 
are used to tackle problems in a variety of fields. Reddy 
et al. [74], for example, use a fuzzy logic classifier for heart 
disease detection, with the derived rules from fuzzy classi-
fiers being optimized using an adaptive genetic algorithm. 
Krishnan et al. [51] describes a fuzzy logic-based smart irri-
gation system using IoT, which sends out periodic acknowl-
edgment messages on task statuses such as soil humidity 
and temperature. Hamamoto et al. [34] describe a network 
anomaly detection method based on fuzzy logic for deter-
mining whether or not a given instance is anomalous. Kang 
et al. [44] proposed a fuzzy weighted association rule min-
ing approach for developing a customer satisfaction product 
form. Overall, we can infer that fuzzy logic can make rea-
sonable conclusions in a world of imprecision, uncertainty, 
and partial data, and thus might be useful in such scenarios 
while building a model.
Knowledge Representation, Uncertainty Reasoning, 
and Expert System Modeling
Knowledge representation is the study of how an intelligent 
agent’s beliefs, intents, and judgments may be expressed 
appropriately for automated reasoning, and it has emerged 
as one of the most promising topics of Artificial Intelli-
gence. Reasoning is the process of using existing knowledge 
to conclude, make predictions, or construct explanations. 
Many types of knowledge can be used in various application 
domains include descriptive knowledge, structural knowl-
edge, procedural knowledge, meta-knowledge, and heuris-
tic knowledge [87]. Knowledge representation is more than 
just storing data in a database; it also allows an intelligent 
machine to learn from its knowledge and experiences to 
act intelligently as a human. As a result, in designing an 
intelligent system, an effective method of knowledge rep-
resentation is required. Several knowledge representation 
approaches exist in the fields that can be utilized to develop 
a knowledge-based conceptual model, including logical, 
semantic network, frame, and production rules [95]. In the 
following, we summarize the potential knowledge represen-
tation strategies taking real-world issues into account.
•	 Ontology-based In general, ontology is “an explicit 
specification of conceptualization and a formal way 
to define the semantics of knowledge and data” [56]. 
According to [56], formally, an ontology is represented 
as “ {O = C, R, I, H, A} , where {C = C1, C2, … , Cn} rep-
resents a set of concepts, and {R = R1, R2, … , Rm} rep-
resents a set of relations defined over the concepts. I rep-
resents a set of instances of concepts, and H represents a 
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) defined by the subsump-
tion relation between concepts, and A represents a set of 
axioms bringing additional constraints on the ontology”. 
Ontology-based knowledge representation and reason-
ing techniques provide sophisticated knowledge about the 
environment for processing tasks or methods. Figure 8 
shows an example of ontology components for the entity 
University [26]. By defining shared and common domain 
theories, ontologies help people and machines to commu-
nicate concisely by supporting semantic knowledge for a 
particular domain. In the area of semantic data mining, 
such ontology-based approaches like classification, min-
ing with association rules, clustering, finding links, etc. 
can play a significant role to build smart systems.
Fig. 8   An example of ontology components for the entity University 
[26]

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 11 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
•	 Rule-base It typically consists of pairs of the condi-
tion, and corresponding action, which means, “IF 
< condition > THEN < action > ” [85]. As a result, an 
agent checks the condition first, and if the condition 
is satisfied, the related rule fires. The key benefit of a 
rule-based system like this is that the “condition” part 
can select which rule is appropriate to use for a given 
scenario. The “action” portion, on the other hand, is 
responsible for implementing the problem’s solutions. 
Furthermore, in a rule-based system, we can easily insert, 
delete, or update rules as needed.
•	 Uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning Probabilistic 
reasoning is a method of knowledge representation in 
which the concept of probability is used to signify the 
uncertainty in knowledge, and where probability theory 
and logic are combined to address the uncertainty [65]. 
Probability is the numerical measure of the possibil-
ity of an event occurring, and it can be defined as the 
chance that an uncertain event will occur. To deal with 
uncertainty in a model, probabilistic models, fuzzy logic, 
Bayesian belief networks, etc. can be employed.
A knowledge-based system, such as an expert system for 
decision-making, relies on these representations of knowl-
edge. The inference engine and the knowledge base are two 
subsystems of the expert system, as represented in Fig. 9. 
The information in the knowledge base is organized accord-
ing to the knowledge representation discussed above. The 
inference engine looks for knowledge-based information 
and linkages and, like a human expert, provides answers, 
predictions, and recommendations. Such a knowledge-based 
system can be found in many application areas. For instance, 
Goel et al. [29] present an ontology-driven context-aware 
framework for smart traffic monitoring. Chukkapalli et al. 
[16] present ontology-driven AI and access control sys-
tems for smart fisheries. Kiran et al. [49] present enhanced 
security-aware technique and ontology data access control 
in cloud computing. Syed et al. [97] present a conceptual 
ontology and cyber intelligence alert system for cyber-
security vulnerability management. An ontology-based 
cyber security policy implementation in Saudi Arabia has 
been presented in Talib et al. [98]. Recently, Sarker et al. 
[90] explores an expert system modeling for personalized 
decision-making in mobile apps. Thus, knowledge repre-
sentation and modeling are important to build AI models as 
well as intelligent decision-making in various application 
areas to solve real-world issues.
Case‑Based Reasoning
Case-based reasoning (CBR) is a cognitive science and AI 
paradigm that represents reasoning as primarily memory-
based. CBR is concerned with the “smart” reuse of knowl-
edge from previously solved problems (“cases”) and its 
adaption to new and unsolved problems. The inference is 
a problem-solving strategy based on the similarity of the 
current situation to previously solved problems recorded in 
a repository. Its premise is that the more similar the two 
issues are, the more similar their solutions will be. Thus, 
case-based reasoners handle new problems by obtaining pre-
viously stored ’cases’ that describe similar earlier problem-
solving experiences and customizing their solutions to meet 
new requirements. For example, patient case histories and 
treatments are utilized in medical education to assist diag-
nose and treating new patients. Figure 10 shows a general 
architecture of case-based reasoning. CBR research looks at 
the CBR process as a model of human cognition as well as 
a method for developing intelligent systems.
CBR is utilized in a variety of applications. Lamy et al. 
[52], for example, provide a visual case-based reasoning 
strategy for explainable artificial intelligence for breast 
cancer. Gonzalez et al. [30] provide a case-based reason-
ing-based energy optimization technique. Khosravani et al. 
[47] offers a case-based reasoning application in a defect 
detection system for dripper manufacturing. Corrales et al. 
[17] provide a case-based reasoning system for data clean-
ing algorithm recommendation in classification and regres-
sion problems. As the number of stored cases grows, CBR 
becomes more intelligent and thus might be useful in such 
scenarios while building a model. However, as the time 
Fig. 9   A general architecture of an expert system
Fig. 10   A general architecture of case-based reasoning

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 12 of 20
SN Computer Science
required to find and process relevant cases increases, the 
system’s efficiency will decline.
Text Mining and Natural Language Processing
Text mining [7], also known as text data mining, similar to 
text analytics, is the process of extracting meaningful infor-
mation from a variety of text or written resources, such as 
websites, books, emails, reviews, docs, comments, articles, 
and so on. Information retrieval, lexical analysis to investi-
gate word frequency distributions, pattern recognition, tag-
ging or annotation, information extraction, and data mining 
techniques such as link and association analysis, visualiza-
tion, and predictive analytics are all part of text analysis. 
Text mining achieves this by employing several analysis 
techniques, such as natural language processing (NLP). NLP 
is a text analysis technique that allows machines to interpret 
human speech. NLP tasks include speech recognition, also 
known as speech-to-text, word segmentation or tokenization, 
lemmatization and stemming, part of speech tagging, pars-
ing, word sense disambiguation, named entity recognition, 
sentiment analysis, topic segmentation and recognition, and 
natural language generation, which is the task of convert-
ing structured data into human language [21]. Fake news 
identification, spam detection, machine translation, question 
answering, social media sentiment analysis, text summariza-
tion, virtual agents and chatbots, and other real-world appli-
cations use NLP techniques.
Although many language-processing systems were built 
in the early days using symbolic approaches, such as hand-
coding a set of rules and looking them up in a dictionary, 
NLP now blends computational linguistics with statistical, 
machine learning, and deep learning models [80, 81]. These 
technologies, when used together, allow computers to pro-
cess human language in the form of text or speech data and 
comprehend its full meaning, including the speaker’s or 
writer’s intent and sentiment. Many works have been done 
in this area. For example, using the feature ensemble model, 
Phan et al. [68] propose a method for improving the perfor-
mance of sentiment analysis of tweets with a fuzzy senti-
ment. Using weighted word embeddings and deep neural 
networks, Onan et al. [62] provide sentiment analysis on 
product reviews. Subramaniyaswamy et al. [96] present sen-
timent analysis of tweets for estimating event criticality and 
security. In [60], the efficacy of social media data in health-
care communication is discussed. Typically, learning tech-
niques rather than static analysis is more effective in terms 
of automation and intelligence in textual modeling or NLP 
systems. In addition to standard machine learning algorithms 
[81], deep learning models and techniques, particularly, 
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recur-
rent neural networks (RNNs) enable such systems to learn 
as they go and extract progressively accurate meaning from 
large amounts of unstructured, unlabeled text and speech 
input. Thus various deep learning techniques including 
generative and discriminative models can be used to build 
powerful textual or NLP model according to their learning 
capabilities from data, discussed briefly in our earlier paper 
Sarker et al. [80], which could also be a significant research 
direction in the area. Overall, we can conclude that by com-
bining machine and deep learning techniques with natural 
language processing, computers can intelligently analyze, 
understand, and infer meaning from human speech or text, 
and thus could be useful for building textual AI models.
Visual Analytics, Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition
Computer vision [99] is also a branch of AI that allows com-
puters and systems to extract useful information from digi-
tal images, videos, and other visual inputs and act or make 
recommendations based on that data. From an engineering 
standpoint, it aims to comprehend and automate operations 
that the human visual system is capable of. As a result, this 
is concerned with the automated extraction, analysis, and 
comprehension of relevant information from a single image 
or a series of images. In terms of technology, it entails the 
creation of a theoretical and algorithmic foundation for 
achieving autonomous visual understanding by processing 
an image at the pixel level. Typical tasks in the field of visual 
analytics and computer vision include object recognition or 
Fig. 11   A general architecture of a convolutional neural network (CNN or ConvNet)

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 13 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
classification, detection, tracking, picture restoration, feature 
matching, image segmentation, scene reconstruction, video 
motion analysis, and so on.
Pattern recognition, which is the automated recognition 
of patterns and regularities in data, is the basis for today’s 
computer vision algorithms. Pattern recognition often 
involves the categorization (supervised learning) and group-
ing (unsupervised learning) of patterns [81]. Although pat-
tern recognition has its roots in statistics and engineering, 
due to the greater availability of huge data and a new wealth 
of processing power, some recent techniques to pattern rec-
ognition include the use of machines and deep learning. 
Convolutional neural networks (CNN or ConvNet) [53, 80] 
have recently demonstrated considerable promise in a vari-
ety of computer vision tasks, including classification, object 
detection, and scene analysis. The general architecture of a 
convolution neural network is depicted in Figure 11. Large 
datasets of thousands or millions of labeled training samples 
are typically used to train these algorithms. However, the 
lack of appropriate data limits the applications that can be 
developed. While enormous volumes of data can be obtained 
fast, supervised learning also necessitates data that has been 
labeled. Unfortunately, data labeling takes a long time and 
costs a lot of money. In this area, a lot of work has been 
done. Elakkiya et al. [25] develop a cervical cancer diag-
nostics healthcare system utilizing hybrid object detection 
adversarial networks in their paper. Harrou et al. [38] present 
an integrated vision-based technique for detecting human 
falls in a residential setting. Pan et al. [63] demonstrated 
a visual recognition based on deep learning for navigation 
mark classification. Typically, learning techniques rather 
than static analysis is more effective in terms of automation 
and intelligence in such visual analytics. In addition to stand-
ard machine learning algorithms [81], various deep learning 
techniques including generative and discriminative models 
can be used to build powerful visual model according to 
their learning capabilities from data, discussed briefly in our 
earlier paper Sarker et al. [80], which could also be a signifi-
cant research direction in the area. Thus, this is important to 
build effective visual AI models in various application areas 
to solve real-world issues in the current age of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution or Industry 4.0, according to the goal 
of this paper.
Hybrid Approach, Searching, and Optimization
A “hybrid approach” is a blend of multiple approaches or 
systems to design a new and superior model. As a result, a 
hybrid strategy integrates the necessary approaches outlined 
above depending on the demands. For instance, in our earlier 
publication, Sarker et al. [85], we have used a hybridization 
of machine learning and knowledge-base expert system to 
build an effective context-aware model for intelligent mobile 
services. In this hybrid context-aware model, context-aware 
rules are discovered using machine learning techniques, 
which are used as the knowledge base of an expert sys-
tem rather than traditional handcrafted static rules to make 
computing and decision-making processes more actionable 
and intelligent. Similarly, in another hybrid approach [68], 
the concepts of fuzzy logic, deep learning, and natural lan-
guage processing were integrated to improve Twitter senti-
ment analysis accuracy. The authors in [33] present a deep 
convolutional neural network-based automated and robust 
object recognition in X-ray baggage inspection, where deep 
learning is integrated with computer vision analysis. Kang 
et al. [44] proposed a fuzzy weighted association rule min-
ing strategy to produce a customer satisfaction product form. 
Moreover, Sarker et al. discussed various machine learning 
[81] and deep learning [80] techniques and their hybridiza-
tion that can be used to solve a variety of real-world prob-
lems in many application areas such as business, finance, 
healthcare, smart cities, cybersecurity, etc. Thus, hybridiza-
tion of multiple techniques could play a key role to build an 
effective AI model in the area.
Moreover, many AI problems can be solved theoretically 
by searching through a large number of possible solutions, 
and the reasoning process may be reduced down to a sim-
ple search. Thus, search strategies, also known as universal 
problem-solving approaches in AI, can also play a signifi-
cant role to solve real-world issues such as gaming, ranking 
web pages, video, and other content in search results, etc., 
due to the properties of its completeness, optimality, time 
complexity, and space complexity. Depending on the nature 
of the problems, search algorithms can be uninformed search 
(a.k.a. blind, brute-force) or informed search (a.k.a. heuristic 
search). Uninformed search [75] refers to a group of general-
purpose search algorithms that generate search trees without 
relying on domain information, such as breadth-first, depth-
first, uniform cost search, etc. Informed search [75] algo-
rithms, on the other hand, use additional or problem-specific 
knowledge in the search process, such as greedy search, A* 
search, graph search, etc. For example, when searching on 
Google Maps, one needs to provide information such as a 
position from the current location to precisely traverse the 
distance, time traveled, and real-time traffic updates on that 
specific route. Informed search can solve a variety of com-
plicated problems that cannot be handled any other way. Fur-
thermore, evolutionary computation employs an optimiza-
tion search technique, such as genetic algorithms, which has 
a great potential to solve real-world issues. For instance, in 
the domain of cybersecurity, a genetic algorithm is used for 
effective feature selection to detect anomalies in fog comput-
ing environment [61]. In [28], genetic algorithm is used for 
optimized feature selection to detect Android malware using 
machine learning techniques. With AI-powered search, the 
platform learns from the data to provide the most accurate 

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 14 of 20
SN Computer Science
and relevant search results automatically. Thus, searching 
as well as optimization techniques can be used as a part of 
hybridization while building AI models to solve real-world 
problems.
Overall, we can conclude that the above explored ten 
potential AI techniques can play a significant role while 
building various AI models such as analytical, functional, 
interactive, textual, and visual models, depending on the 
nature of the problem and target application. In the next 
section, we summarize various real-world application areas, 
where these AI techniques are employed in today’s inter-
connected world towards automation, intelligent and smart 
systems.
Real‑World Applications of AI
AI approaches have been effectively applied to a variety of 
issues in a variety of application areas throughout the last 
several years. Healthcare, cybersecurity, business, social 
media, virtual reality and assistance, robotics, and many 
other application areas are common nowadays. We have 
outlined some potential real-world AI application areas in 
Fig. 12. Various AI techniques, such as machine learning, 
deep learning, knowledge discovery, reasoning, natural lan-
guage processing, expert system modeling, and many oth-
ers, as detailed above in “Potential AI techniques” are used 
in these application domains. We have also listed several 
AI tasks and techniques that are utilized to solve in several 
real-world application areas in Table 3. Overall, we can con-
clude from Fig. 12 and Table 3 that the future prospects of 
AI modeling in real-world application domains are vast and 
there are several opportunities to work and conduct research. 
In the following section, we discuss the future aspect of AI 
as well as research issues towards automation, intelligent 
and smart systems.
Future Aspect and Research Issues
Artificial intelligence is influencing the future of almost 
every sector and every person on the planet. AI has acted 
as the driving force behind developing technologies for 
industrial automation, medical applications, agriculture, 
IoT applications, cybersecurity services, etc. summarized 
in “Future Aspect and Research Issues”, and it will continue 
to do so for the foreseeable future. This interdisciplinary sci-
ence comes with numerous advancements and approaches 
that are possible with the help of deep learning, machine 
learning algorithms, knowledge-base expert systems, natu-
ral language processing, visual recognition, etc. discussed 
briefly in “Potential AI techniques”. Thus, by taking into 
account the capabilities of AI technologies, we illustrate 
three essential terms, mentioned in “Introduction” within 
the scope of our study. These are
Fig. 12   Several potential 
real-world application areas of 
artificial intelligence (AI)

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 15 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
•	 Automation One of the main themes of today’s applica-
tions is automation, which encompasses a wide range of 
technologies that reduce human interaction in operations. 
A program, a script, or batch processing are commonly 
used in computing to automate tasks. AI-based automa-
tion takes the insights gained through computational ana-
lytics to the next level, allowing for automated decision-
making. As a result, we can describe automation as the 
development and implementation of technology to manu-
facture and deliver products and services to increase the 
efficiency, dependability, and/or speed of various jobs 
traditionally handled by humans. In customer service, 
for example, virtual assistants can lower expenses while 
empowering both customers and human agents, resulting 
in a better customer experience. Artificial intelligence 
technology has the potential to automate almost any 
industry and every person on the planet.
•	 Intelligent computing It is also known as computational 
intelligence, and it refers to a computer’s or system’s 
ability to extract insights or usable knowledge from data 
or experimental observation, or to learn a specific task. 
Intelligent computing methodologies include informa-
Table 3   A summary of AI tasks and methods in several popular real-world applications areas
AI techniques
Application areas
Tasks
References
Machine learning
Healthcare
Cybersecurity
Smartcity
Recommendation systems
COVID-19 aid
Anomaly and Attack Detection
Smart parking pricing system
Hotel recommendation
Blumenstock et al. [12]
Sarker et al. [78], Sarker et al. [89],
Saharan et al. [76],
Ramzan et al. [73]
Neural network and deep learnig
Healthcare
Cybersecurity
Smart cities
Smart Agriculture
Business and Finance
Virtual Assistant
Visual Recognition
Diagnosis of COVID-19
Malware detection
Smart parking system
Plant disease detection
Stock trend prediction
An intelligent chatbot
Facial expression analysis
Aslan et al. [9], Islam et al. [41]
Kim et al. [48], Wang et al. [100]
Piccialli et al. [69]
Ale et al. [6]
Anuradha et al. [8]
Dhyani et al. [22]
Li et al. [54]
Data mining, knowledge discovery and 
advanced analytics
Education
Business
Cybersecurity
Diagnostic analytics
Prescriptive analytics
Decision support systems
Maximising competitive advantage
Human-centred data mining
To mature gas fields
Optimizing outpatient appointment
Hamed et al. [35]
Alazab et al. [5]
Afzaliseresht et al. [1]
Poort et al. [70]
Srinivas et al. [94]
Rule-based modeling and decision-
making
Intelligent systems
Healthcare
Recommendation system
Smart systems
Mining contextual rules
Identifying risk factors
Web page recommendation
Risk prediction
Sarker et. al [88]
Borah et al. [13]
Bhavithra et al. [11]
Xu et al. [103]
Fuzzy logic-based approach
Healthcare
Agriculture
Cybersecurity
Business
Heart disease diagnosis
Smart irrigation
Network anomaly detection system
Customer satisfaction
Reddy et al. [74]
Krishnan et al. [51]
Hamamoto et al. [34]
Kang et al. [44]
Knowledge representation,
Uncertainty reasoning and
Expert system modeling
Smart systems
cloud computing
cybersecurity
Mobile expert system
Smart traffic monitoring
Ontology data access control
Vulnerability management
Personalized decision-making
Goel et al. [29]
Kiran et al. [49]
Syed et al. [97]
Sarker et al. [90]
Case-based reasoning
Healthcare
Smart cities
Smart Industry
Recommendation Systems
Breast cancer management
Energy management
Fault detection system
Classification and regression tasks
Lamy et al. [52]
Gonzalez et al. [30]
Khosravani et al. [47]
Corrales et al. [17]
Text mining and natural language 
processing
Sentiment analysis
Business
Cybersecurity
Healthcare
Sentiment analysis of tweets
Product reviews sentiment
Estimating security of events
Effectiveness of social media
Phan et al. [68]
Onan et al. [62]
Subramaniyaswamy et al. [96]
Nawaz et al. [60]
Visual analytics, computer vision and 
pattern recognition
Healthcare
Computer vision
Visual Analytics
Cervical cancer diagnostics
Human fall detection
Navigation mark classification
Elakkiya et al. [25]
Arrou et al. [38]
Pan et al. [63]
Hybrid approach, searching and opti-
mization
Mobile application
Recommendation systems
Sentiment analysis
Business
Cybersecurity
Personalized decision-making
Personalized hotel recommendation
Tweet sentiment accuracy analysis
Customer satisfaction
Optimum feature selection
Sarker et al. [90]
Ramzan et al. [73]
phan et al. [68]
Kang et al. [44]
Onah et al. [61], Fatima et al. [28]

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 16 of 20
SN Computer Science
tion processing, data mining, and knowledge discovery, 
as well as machine learning, pattern recognition, signal 
processing, natural language processing, fuzzy systems, 
knowledge representation, and reasoning. Transportation, 
industry, health, agriculture, business, finance, security, 
and other fields could all benefit from intelligent systems. 
Thus, the above-mentioned AI techniques, discussed in 
“Potential AI techniques” are the main drivers for per-
forming intelligent computing as well as decision-mak-
ing.
•	 Smart computing The word “Smart” can be described 
as self-monitoring, analyzing, and reporting technology 
in smart computing, and the word “Computing” can be 
defined as computational analysis. As a result, it can be 
thought of as the next generation of computing, which is 
used to create something self-aware, that is, something 
that can sense the activities of its environment, massage 
the gathered data, perform some analytics, and provide 
the best decisions while also predicting future risks and 
challenges. In other words, it is a significant multidisci-
plinary area in which AI-based computational methods 
and technologies, as explained in “Potential AI tech-
niques”, are integrated with engineering approaches to 
produce systems, applications, and new services that suit 
societal demands. Overall, it strives to construct a smart 
system by monitoring, analyzing, and reporting data in 
a faster and smarter manner, with AI-based modeling 
playing a vital part in system intelligence and decision-
making.
The above terms are also the key focus of the current 
fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0). Business, health 
care, energy, transportation systems, environment, secu-
rity, surveillance, industrial systems, information retrieval 
and publication, entertainment and creativity, and social 
activities can all benefit from automation, intelligence, and 
smart computer systems. For example, chatbots, consumer 
personalization, image-based targeting advertising, and 
warehouse and inventory automation are all examples of 
how AI will continue to drive e-commerce. The potential 
benefits of using AI in medicine are now being investi-
gated. The medical industry has a wealth of data that may 
be used to develop healthcare-related predictive models. 
Manufacturing, notably the automobile industry, will 
be significantly impacted by AI. AI will have an impact 
on sales operations in a range of industries. Marketing 
tactics, such as business models, sales procedures, and 
customer service options, as well as customer behavior, 
are predicted to be significantly influenced by AI. AI and 
machine learning will be key technologies in cybersecu-
rity for identifying and forecasting threats [77, 89]. AI 
will be a vital tool for financial security because of its 
ability to analyze large amounts of data, foresee fraud, 
and identify it. In the near future, interacting with AI will 
surely become commonplace. Artificial intelligence can be 
used to solve incredibly difficult problems and find solu-
tions that are vital to human well-being. These develop-
ments have enormous economic and societal implications. 
Thus, we can say, AI’s potential is limitless and its future 
will be shaped by our decisions and actions. While our 
discussion has established a solid foundation on AI-based 
systems and applications, hence we outline the below ten 
research issues.
•	 Several potential AI techniques exist in the area with 
the capability of solving problems, discussed in “Poten-
tial AI techniques”. To understand the nature of the 
problem and an in-depth analysis is important to find 
a suitable solution, i.e., detecting cyber-anomalies or 
attacks [78]. Thus, the challenge is “Which AI tech-
nique is most suited to solving a specific real-world 
problem, taking into account the problem’s nature?”
•	 One promising research direction for AI-based solu-
tions is to develop a general framework that can handle 
the issues involved. A well-designed framework and 
experimental evaluation are both a crucial direction and 
a significant challenge. Thus, the question is “How can 
we design an effective AI-based framework to achieve 
the target outcome by taking into account the issues 
involved?”
•	 The digital world contains a wealth of data in this age 
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0 or 
4IR), including IoT data, corporate data, health data, 
cellular data, urban data, cybersecurity data, and many 
more [79]. Extracting insights using various analytical 
methods is important for smart decision-making in a 
particular system. Thus, the question is “How to extract 
useful insights or knowledge from real-world raw data 
to build an automated and intelligent system for a par-
ticular business problem?
•	 Nowadays, data are considered as the most valuable 
resource in the world and various machine learning 
[81] and deep learning [80] techniques are used to learn 
from data or past experience, which automates analyti-
cal model building. The increase in data and such data-
driven analytical modeling have made AI the highest 
growth in history. Thus, it’s important to do some data 
pre-processing tasks to feed into the ultimate machine 
learning model, so the data behaves nicely for the model. 
Therefore, the question is “How to effectively feed data 
to a machine or deep learning model to solve a particular 
real-world problem?”
•	 The traditional machine learning [81] and deep learning 
[80] techniques may not be directly applicable for the 
expected outcome in many cases. Thus, designing new 
techniques or their variants by taking into account model 

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 17 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
optimization, accuracy, and applicability, according to 
the nature of the data and target real-world application, 
could be a novel contribution in the area. Therefore the 
question is—“How to design an effective learning algo-
rithm or model allowing the application to learn auto-
matically from the patterns or features in the data?”
•	 In the domain of today’s smart computing, the term 
‘context-awareness’ typically refers to a system’s capac-
ity to gather information about its surroundings at any 
given time and adapt its behavior accordingly. Thus, the 
concept of context-aware machine learning can play a 
key role to build an intelligent context-aware applica-
tion, highlighted in our book Sarker et al. [85]. Thus, 
the question is “How to effectively incorporate context-
awareness in an AI-based smart system that can sense 
from the surrounding environment and make intelligent 
decisions accordingly?”
•	 Decision rules, represented as IF-THEN statement, can 
play an important role in the area of AI. Expert systems, 
a core part of AI, are typically used to solve many real-
world complex problems by reasoning through knowl-
edge, which are mostly represented by such IF-THEN 
rules rather than traditional procedural code [85]. Thus, 
a rule-based system can manipulate knowledge and inter-
pret information in a useful way.  Therefore, the question 
is “How can we design an automated rule-based system 
emulating the decision-making ability of a human expert 
through discovering a concise set of IF-THEN rules from 
the data?
•	 A decision support system is a type of information 
system that aids in the decision-making process of a 
business or organization. AI techniques discussed in 
“Potential AI techniques” can play a key role to pro-
vide intelligent decisions across a wide range of sectors 
(e.g., business, education, healthcare, etc.) rather than 
the traditional system, according to the nature of the 
problem. Thus, the challenge is “How can we design 
an AI-assisted decision-support system that aids a team 
or organization in making better decisions?”
•	 Uncertainty refers to an event’s lack of confidence or 
certainty, e.g., information occurred from unreliable 
sources. Several strategies, such as the probability-
based model or fuzzy logic, discussed in “Potential AI 
techniques” allow for the processing of uncertain and 
imprecise knowledge while also providing a sophisti-
cated reasoning framework. The ability of AI to iden-
tify and handle uncertainty and risk is essential for 
applying AI to decision-making challenges. Thus, the 
question is “How to manage uncertainty in AI-enabled 
decision-making applications”.
•	 With the widespread availability of various IoT ser-
vices, Internet of things (IoT) devices are becoming 
more common in mobile networks. It is essential 
nowadays to have a lightweight solution that promises 
high-performing artificial intelligence applications for 
mobile and IoT devices. Thus, the question is “How 
to design AI-enabled lightweight model for intelligent 
decision-making through IoT and mobile devices”.
To summarize, AI is a relatively open topic to which aca-
demics can contribute by inventing new methods or refin-
ing existing methods to address the issues raised above and 
solve real-world problems in a range of application areas. 
AI will be employed in any context where large amounts 
of data are needed to be handled fast and accurately, and 
cost savings are required. AI will affect the planet more 
than anything else in human history. One important thing 
is that AI-powered automation does not pose a threat to 
jobs in the workplace for individuals, businesses, or coun-
tries with the appropriate skills. AI-certified professionals 
have access to a wide range of job prospects. AI Engineer, 
Artificial Intelligence Programmer, AI System Developer, 
Data Scientist, Machine Learning Engineer, Data Analyst, 
AI Architect, Deep Learning Engineer, AI Software Engi-
neer, and many other employment opportunities are avail-
able to these professionals.
Overall, AI technologies are driving a new wave of 
economic progress, resolving some of the world’s most 
challenging issues and delivering solutions to some of 
humanity’s most significant challenges. Many industries, 
including information technology, telecommunications, 
transportation, traffic management, health care, education, 
criminal justice, defense, banking, and agriculture, have 
the potential to be transformed by artificial intelligence. 
Without compromising the significant characteristics that 
identify mankind, we can assure that AI systems are delib-
erate, intelligent, and flexible with adequate security. Gov-
ernments and decision-makers of a country need to focus 
public policies that promote AI innovation while minimiz-
ing unexpected societal consequences to realize its full 
potential in real-world scenarios.
Concluding Remarks
In this article, we have provided a comprehensive view of 
AI-based modeling which is considered a key component 
of the fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0). It begins 
with research motivation and proceeds to AI techniques and 
breakthroughs in many application domains. Then in numer-
ous dimensions, the important techniques in this area are 
explored. We take into account ten categories of popular 
AI techniques in this thorough analysis, including machine 
learning, deep learning, natural language processing, knowl-
edge discovery, expert system modeling, etc., which can be 

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 18 of 20
SN Computer Science
applied in a variety of applications depending on current 
demands. In terms of machine intelligence, complex learn-
ing algorithms should be trained using data and knowledge 
from the target application before the system can help with 
intelligent decision-making.
Overall, AI techniques have proven to be beneficial in a 
variety of applications and research fields, including busi-
ness intelligence, finance, healthcare, visual recognition, 
smart cities, IoT, cybersecurity, and many more, as explored 
in the paper. Finally, we explored the future aspects of AI 
towards automation, intelligence, and smart computing sys-
tems, highlighting several research issues within the scope of 
our study. This can also aid researchers in conducting more 
in-depth analyses, resulting in a more reliable and realistic 
outcome. Overall, we feel that our study and discussion on 
AI-based modeling points in the right direction and can be 
used as a reference guide for future research and develop-
ment in relevant application domains by academics as well 
as industry professionals.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and 
its Member Institutions.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The author declares no conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
	 1.	 Afzaliseresht N, Miao Y, Michalska S, Liu Q, Wang H. From 
logs to stories: human-centred data mining for cyber threat intel-
ligence. IEEE Access. 2020;8:19089–99.
	 2.	 Agrawal R, Imieliński T, Swami A. Mining association rules 
between sets of items in large databases. In: ACM SIGMOD 
record, ACM; vol 22, pp. 207–216 (1993).
	 3.	 Agrawal R, Srikant R. Fast algorithms for mining association 
rules. In: Proceedings of the international joint conference on 
very large data bases, Santiago Chile, vol 1215, pp. 487–499 
(1994).
	 4.	 Aha DW, Kibler D, Albert MK. Instance-based learning algo-
rithms. Mach Learn. 1991;6(1):37–66.
	 5.	 Alazab A, Bevinakoppa S, Khraisat A. Maximising competitive 
advantage on e-business websites: a data mining approach. In: 
2018 IEEE conference on big data and analytics (ICBDA), IEEE; 
2018. p. 111–116.
	 6.	 Ale L, Sheta A, Li L, Wang Y, Zhang N. Deep learning based 
plant disease detection for smart agriculture. In: 2019 IEEE 
globecom workshops (GC Wkshps), IEEE; 2019. p. 1–6.
	 7.	 Allahyari M, Pouriyeh S, Assefi M, Safaei S, Trippe ED, Gutier-
rez JB, Kochut K. A brief survey of text mining: classification, 
clustering and extraction techniques. arXiv:​1707.​02919 (arXiv 
preprint), 2017.
	 8.	 Anuradha J, et al. Big data based stock trend prediction using 
deep cnn with reinforcement-lstm model. Int J Syst Assur Eng 
Manage. 2021;2:1–11.
	 9.	 Aslan MF, Unlersen MF, Sabanci K, Durdu A. Cnn-based trans-
fer learning-bilstm network: a novel approach for covid-19 infec-
tion detection. Appl Soft Comput. 2021;98:106912.
	 10.	 Bellman R. A markovian decision process. J Math Mech. 
1957;2:679–84.
	 11.	 Bhavithra J, Saradha A. Personalized web page recommendation 
using case-based clustering and weighted association rule min-
ing. Cluster Comput. 2019;22(3):6991–7002.
	 12.	 Blumenstock J. Machine learning can help get covid-19 aid to 
those who need it most. Nature. 2020;20:20.
	 13.	 Borah A, Nath B. Identifying risk factors for adverse diseases 
using dynamic rare association rule mining. Expert Syst Appl. 
2018;113:233–63.
	 14.	 Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45(1):5–32.
	 15.	 Breiman L, Friedman J, Stone CJ, Olshen RA. Classification and 
regression trees. New York: CRC Press; 1984.
	 16.	 Chukkapalli SSL, Aziz SB, Alotaibi N, Mittal S, Gupta M, 
Abdelsalam M. Ontology driven ai and access control systems 
for smart fisheries. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM workshop 
on secure and trustworthy cyber-physical systems, 2021. p. 
59–68.
	 17.	 Corrales DC, Ledezma A, Corrales JC. A case-based reason-
ing system for recommendation of data cleaning algorithms 
in classification and regression tasks. Appl Soft Comput. 
2020;90:106180.
	 18.	 Das A, Ng W-K, Woon Y-K. Rapid association rule mining. In: 
Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information 
and knowledge management, ACM; 2001. p. 474–481.
	 19.	 Da’u A, Salim N. Recommendation system based on deep learn-
ing methods: a systematic review and new directions. Artif Intell 
Rev. 2020;53(4):2709–48.
	 20.	 Li Deng. A tutorial survey of architectures, algorithms, and 
applications for deep learning. APSIPA Trans Signal Inf Process. 
2014;3:20.
	 21.	 Deng L, Liu Y. Deep learning in natural language processing. 
Berlin: Springer; 2018.
	 22.	 Dhyani M, Kumar R. An intelligent chatbot using deep learning 
with bidirectional rnn and attention model. Mater Today Proc. 
2021;34:817–24.
	 23.	 Dua Su, Du X. Data mining and machine learning in cybersecu-
rity. 2016.
	 24.	 Dupond S. A thorough review on the current advance of neural 
network structures. Annu Rev Control. 2019;14:200–30.
	 25.	 Elakkiya R, Subramaniyaswamy V, Vijayakumar V, Aniket 
Mahanti. Cervical cancer diagnostics healthcare system using 
hybrid object detection adversarial networks. IEEE J Biomed 
Health Inform. 2021;20:20.
	 26.	 Elliman D, Pulido JRG. Visualizing ontology components 
through self-organizing maps. In: Proceedings sixth interna-
tional conference on information visualisation, IEEE; 2002. p. 
434–438.

SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158	
Page 19 of 20 
158
SN Computer Science
	 27.	 Ester M, Kriegel H-P, Sander J, Xiaowei X, et al. A density-based 
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with 
noise. In Kdd. 1996;96:226–31.
	 28.	 Fatima A, Maurya R, Dutta MK, Burget R, Masek J. Android 
malware detection using genetic algorithm based optimized fea-
ture selection and machine learning. In: 2019 42nd international 
conference on telecommunications and signal processing (TSP), 
IEEE; 2019. p. 220–223.
	 29.	 Goel D, Pahal N, Jain P, Chaudhury S. An ontology-driven con-
text aware framework for smart traffic monitoring. In: 2017 IEEE 
region 10 symposium (TENSYMP), IEEE; 2017. p. 1–5.
	 30.	 González-Briones A, Prieto J, De La Prieta F, Herrera-Viedma E, 
Corchado JM. Energy optimization using a case-based reasoning 
strategy. Sensors. 2018;18(3):865.
	 31.	 Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A, Bengio Y. Deep learning, 
vol. 1. Cambridge: MIT press; 2016.
	 32.	 Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Bing X, Warde-Farley 
D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y. Generative adversarial nets. 
In: Advances in neural information processing systems, 2014. p. 
2672–2680.
	 33.	 Bangzhong Gu, Rongjun Ge, Yang Chen, Limin Luo, Gouenou 
Coatrieux. Automatic and robust object detection in x-ray bag-
gage inspection using deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE 
Trans Ind Electron. 2020;20:20.
	 34.	 Hamamoto AH, Carvalho LF, Sampaio LDH, Abrão T, Proença 
ML Jr. Network anomaly detection system using genetic algo-
rithm and fuzzy logic. Expert Syst Appl. 2018;92:390–402.
	 35.	 Hamed M, Mahmoud T, Gómez JM, Kfouri G. Using data mining 
and business intelligence to develop decision support systems 
in Arabic higher education institutions. In: Modernizing aca-
demic teaching and research in business and economics. Berlin: 
Springer; 2017. p. 71–84.
	 36.	 Han J, Pei J, Kamber M. Data mining: concepts and techniques. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2011.
	 37.	 Han J, Pei J, Yin Y. Mining frequent patterns without candidate 
generation. In: ACM Sigmod Record, vol 29, ACM; 2000. p. 
1–12.
	 38.	 Harrou F, Zerrouki N, Sun Y, Houacine A. An integrated vision-
based approach for efficient human fall detection in a home envi-
ronment. IEEE Access. 2019;7:114966–74.
	 39.	 Hinton GE. Deep belief networks. Scholarpedia. 2009;4(5):5947.
	 40.	 Hotelling H. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into 
principal components. J Educ Psychol. 1933;24(6):417.
	 41.	 Islam MZ, Islam MM, Asraf A. A combined deep cnn-lstm net-
work for the detection of novel coronavirus (covid-19) using 
x-ray images. Inform Med Unlocked. 2020;20:100412.
	 42.	 John GH, Langley P. Estimating continuous distributions in 
bayesian classifiers. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh conference 
on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
lishers Inc.; 1995. p. 338–345.
	 43.	 Kaelbling LP, Littman ML, Moore AW. Reinforcement learning: 
a survey. J Artif Intell Res. 1996;4:237–85.
	 44.	 Kang X, Porter CS, Bohemia E. Using the fuzzy weighted asso-
ciation rule mining approach to develop a customer satisfaction 
product form. J Intell Fuzzy Syst. 2020;38(4):4343–57.
	 45.	 Kaufman L, Rousseeuw PJ. Finding groups in data: an introduc-
tion to cluster analysis, vol. 344. New York: Wiley; 2009.
	 46.	 Keerthi SS, Shevade SK, Bhattacharyya C, Murthy KRK. 
Improvements to platt’s smo algorithm for svm classifier design. 
Neural Comput. 2001;13(3):637–49.
	 47.	 Khosravani MR, Nasiri S, Weinberg K. Application of case-based 
reasoning in a fault detection system on production of drippers. 
Appl Soft Comput. 2019;75:227–32.
	 48.	 Kim J-Y, Seok-Jun B, Cho S-B. Zero-day malware detection 
using transferred generative adversarial networks based on deep 
autoencoders. Inf Sci. 2018;460:83–102.
	 49.	 Kiran GM, Nalini N. Enhanced security-aware technique and 
ontology data access control in cloud computing. Int J Commun 
Syst. 2020;33(15):e4554.
	 50.	 Kohonen T. The self-organizing map. Proc IEEE. 
1990;78(9):1464–80.
	 51.	 Krishnan RS, Julie EG, Robinson YH, Raja S, Kumar R, Thong 
PH, et al. Fuzzy logic based smart irrigation system using inter-
net of things. J Clean Prod. 2020;252:119902.
	 52.	 Lamy J-B, Sekar B, Guezennec G, Bouaud J, Séroussi B. 
Explainable artificial intelligence for breast cancer: a visual case-
based reasoning approach. Artif Intell Med. 2019;94:42–53.
	 53.	 LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P. Gradient-based 
learning applied to document recognition. Proc IEEE. 
1998;86(11):2278–324.
	 54.	 Li T-HS, Kuo P-H, Tsai T-N, Luan P-C. Cnn and lstm based 
facial expression analysis model for a humanoid robot. IEEE 
Access. 2019;7:93998–4011.
	 55.	 MacQueen James et al. Some methods for classification and 
analysis of multivariate observations. In: Proceedings of the fifth 
Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, 
vol 1. Oakland, CA, USA; 1967. p. 281–297
	 56.	 Maedche A, Staab S. Ontology learning for the semantic web. 
IEEE Intell Syst. 2001;16(2):72–9.
	 57.	 Mandic D, Chambers J. Recurrent neural networks for predic-
tion: learning algorithms, architectures and stability. New York: 
Wiley; 2001.
	 58.	 Marlin B, Swersky K, Chen B, Freitas N. Inductive principles 
for restricted boltzmann machine learning. In: Proceedings of the 
thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and 
statistics, p. 509–516. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceed-
ings, 2010.
	 59.	 Maynard AD. Navigating the fourth industrial revolution. Nat 
Nanotechnol. 2015;10(12):1005–6.
	 60.	 Nawaz MS, Bilal M, Lali MIU, Mustafa RU, Aslam W, Jajja S. 
Effectiveness of social media data in healthcare communication. 
J Med Imaging Health Inform. 2017;7(6):1365–71.
	 61.	 Onah JO, Abdullahi M, Hassan IH, Al-Ghusham A, et al. Genetic 
algorithm based feature selection and naïve bayes for anomaly 
detection in fog computing environment. Mach Learn Appl. 
2021;6:100156.
	 62.	 Aytuğ Onan. Sentiment analysis on product reviews based on 
weighted word embeddings and deep neural networks. Concurr 
Comput Pract Exp. 2020;20:e5909.
	 63.	 Pan M, Liu Y, Jiayi Cao Yu, Li CL, Chen C-H. Visual recognition 
based on deep learning for navigation mark classification. IEEE 
Access. 2020;8:32767–75.
	 64.	 Park H-S, Jun C-H. A simple and fast algorithm for k-medoids 
clustering. Expert Syst Appl. 2009;36(2):3336–41.
	 65.	 Pearl J. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks 
of plausible inference. Burlington: Morgan kaufmann; 1988.
	 66.	 Pearson K. Liii. on lines and planes of closest fit to systems 
of points in space. Lond Edinburgh Dublin Philos Mag J Sci. 
1901;2(11):559–72.
	 67.	 Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, 
Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss R, Dubourg V, et al. 
Scikit-learn: machine learning in python. J Mach Learn Res. 
2011;12:2825–30.
	 68.	 Phan HT, Tran VC, Nguyen NT, Hwang D. Improving the 
performance of sentiment analysis of tweets containing fuzzy 
sentiment using the feature ensemble model. IEEE Access. 
2020;8:14630–41.
	 69.	 Piccialli F, Giampaolo F, Prezioso E, Crisci D, Cuomo S. Pre-
dictive analytics for smart parking: a deep learning approach 
in forecasting of iot data. ACM Trans Internet Technol. 
2021;21(3):1–21.

	
SN Computer Science (2022) 3:158
158 
Page 20 of 20
SN Computer Science
	 70.	 Poort J, Omrani PS, Vecchia AL, Visser G, Janzen M, Koenes 
J. An automated diagnostic analytics workflow for the detection 
of production events-application to mature gas fields. In: Abu 
Dhabi international petroleum exhibition and conference. One-
Petro; 2020.
	 71.	 Quinlan JR. Induction of decision trees. Mach Learn. 
1986;1(1):81–106.
	 72.	 Ross Quinlan J. C4.5: programs for machine learning. Mach 
Learn. 1993;20:20.
	 73.	 Ramzan B, Bajwa IS, Jamil N, Amin RU, Ramzan S, Mirza F, 
Sarwar N. An intelligent data analysis for recommendation sys-
tems using machine learning. Sci Programm. 2019;20:19.
	 74.	 Reddy GT, Reddy MPK, Lakshmanna K, Rajput DS, Kaluri R, 
Srivastava G. Hybrid genetic algorithm and a fuzzy logic classi-
fier for heart disease diagnosis. Evol Intel. 2020;13(2):185–96.
	 75.	 Russell S, Norvig P. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach, 
global edition 4th. Foundations. 2021;19:23.
	 76.	 Saharan S, Kumar N, Bawa S. An efficient smart parking pricing 
system for smart city environment: a machine-learning based 
approach. Future Gener Comput Syst. 2020;106:622–40.
	 77.	 Sarker IH. Ai-driven cybersecurity: an overview, security intel-
ligence modeling and research directions. SN Comput Sci. 
2021;20:21.
	 78.	 Sarker Iqbal H. Cyberlearning: effectiveness analysis of machine 
learning security modeling to detect cyber-anomalies and multi-
attacks. Internet Things. 2021;100:393.
	 79.	 Sarker Iqbal H. Data science and analytics: an overview from 
data-driven smart computing, decision-making and applications 
perspective. SN Comput Sci. 2021;20:21.
	 80.	 Sarker IH. Deep learning: a comprehensive overview on tech-
niques, taxonomy, applications and research directions. SN Com-
put Sci. 2021;2(6):1–20.
	 81.	 Sarker IH. Machine learning: algorithms, real-world applications 
and research directions. SN Comput Sci. 2021;2(3):1–21.
	 82.	 Sarker IH, Abushark YB, Alsolami F, Khan AI. Intrudtree: a 
machine learning based cyber security intrusion detection model. 
Symmetry. 2020;12(5):754.
	 83.	 Sarker IH, Colman A, Han J. Recencyminer: mining recency-
based personalized behavior from contextual smartphone data. J 
Big Data. 2019;6(1):1–21.
	 84.	 Sarker IH, Colman A, Han J, Khan AI, Abushark YB, Salah K. 
Behavdt: a behavioral decision tree learning to build user-centric 
context-aware predictive model. Mob Netw Appl. 2019;20:1–11.
	 85.	 Sarker IH, Colman A, Han J, Watters P. Context-aware machine 
learning and mobile data analytics: automated rule-based ser-
vices with intelligent decision-making. Berlin: Springer; 2022.
	 86.	 Sarker IH, Colman A, Kabir MA, Han J. Individualized time-
series segmentation for mining mobile phone user behavior. 
Comput J. 2018;61(3):349–68.
	 87.	 Sarker IH, Hoque MM, Uddin MK, Alsanoosy T. Mobile data 
science and intelligent apps: concepts, AI-based modeling and 
research directions. Mobile Netw Appl. 2020;20:1–19.
	 88.	 Sarker Iqbal H, Kayes ASM. Abc-ruleminer: user behavioral 
rule-based machine learning method for context-aware intelli-
gent services. J Netw Comput Appl. 2020;10:2762.
	 89.	 Sarker IH, Kayes ASM, Badsha S, Alqahtani H, Watters P, Ng A. 
Cybersecurity data science: an overview from machine learning 
perspective. J Big Data. 2020;7(1):1–29.
	 90.	 Sarker IH, Khan AI, Abushark YB, Alsolami F. Mobile expert 
system: exploring context-aware machine learning rules for per-
sonalized decision-making in mobile applications. Symmetry. 
2021;13(10):1975.
	 91.	 Beata Ślusarczyk. Industry 4.0: are we ready? Pol J Manage Stud. 
2018;17:20.
	 92.	 Sneath PHA. The application of computers to taxonomy. J Gener 
Microbiol. 1957;17:1.
	 93.	 Thorvald Sorensen. method of establishing groups of equal 
amplitude in plant sociology based on similarity of species. Biol 
Skr. 1948;5:20.
	 94.	 Srinivas S, Ravindran AR. Optimizing outpatient appoint-
ment system using machine learning algorithms and schedul-
ing rules: a prescriptive analytics framework. Expert Syst Appl. 
2018;102:245–61.
	 95.	 Stephan G, Pascal H, Andreas A. Knowledge representation 
and ontologies. Semant Web Serv Concepts Technol Appl. 
2007;20:51–105.
	 96.	 Subramaniyaswamy V,  Logesh R,  Abejith M, Umasankar 
S, Umamakeswari A. Sentiment analysis of tweets for estimat-
ing criticality and security of events. In: Improving the safety and 
efficiency of emergency services: emerging tools and technolo-
gies for first responders. IGI global; 2020. p. 293–319.
	 97.	 Syed R. Cybersecurity vulnerability management: a conceptual 
ontology and cyber intelligence alert system. Inform Manage. 
2020;57(6):103334.
	 98.	 Talib AM, Alomary FO, Alwadi HF, Albusayli RR, et al. Ontol-
ogy-based cyber security policy implementation in Saudi Arabia. 
J Inf Secur. 2018;9(04):315.
	 99.	 Athanasios Voulodimos, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios Dou-
lamis, Eftychios Protopapadakis. Deep learning for computer 
vision: a brief review. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2018;20:18.
	100.	 Wang W, Zhao M, Wang J. Effective android malware detec-
tion with a hybrid model based on deep autoencoder and con-
volutional neural network. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput. 
2019;10(8):3035–43.
	101.	 Witten IH, Frank E. Data mining: practical machine learning 
tools and techniques. Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann; 2005.
	102.	 Witten IH, Frank E, Trigg LE, Hall MA, Holmes G, Cunningham 
SJ. Weka: practical machine learning tools and techniques with 
java implementations. 1999.
	103.	 Ruihua X, Luo F. Risk prediction and early warning for air traffic 
controllers’ unsafe acts using association rule mining and random 
forest. Saf Sci. 2021;135:105125.
	104.	 Zadeh LA. Is there a need for fuzzy logic? Inf Sci. 
2008;178(13):2751–79.
	105.	 Zaki MJ. Scalable algorithms for association mining. IEEE Trans 
Knowl Data Eng. 2000;12(3):372–90.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
