Challenges of deep learning in medical 
image analysis – improving explainability 
and trust 
Article 
Accepted Version 
Dhar, T., Dey, N., Borra, S. and Sherratt, R. S. ORCID: 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7899-4445 (2023) Challenges of 
deep learning in medical image analysis – improving 
explainability and trust. IEEE Transactions on Technology and 
Society, 4 (1). pp. 68-75. ISSN 2637-6415 doi: 
10.1109/TTS.2023.3234203 Available at 
https://centaur.reading.ac.uk/109789/ 
It is advisable to refer to the publisher’s version if you intend to cite from the 
work.  See Guidance on citing.
To link to this article DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TTS.2023.3234203 
Publisher: IEEE 
All outputs in CentAUR are protected by Intellectual Property Rights law, 
including copyright law. Copyright and IPR is retained by the creators or other 
copyright holders. Terms and conditions for use of this material are defined in 
the End User Agreement . 
www.reading.ac.uk/centaur 

CentAUR 
Central Archive at the University of Reading 
Reading’s research outputs online

1 
 
Full Text Version 
 
 
Challenges of Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis – Improving 
Explainability and Trust 
 
 
IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society 
 
DOI: 10.1109/TTS.2023.3234203 
Accepted: 1st Jan 2023. 
Published on-line: 5th Jan 2023. 
 
Authors: 
Tribikram Dhar, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata-712235, India. (Email: 
dhartribikram@gmail.com) 
 
Nilanjan Dey, Senior Member, IEEE, 
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Techno International New Town, Kolkata-700156, 
India. (Email: nilanjan.dey@tint.edu.in) 
 
Surekha Borra, Senior Member, IEEE, 
Department of Electronics and Communication, K. S.   Institute of Technology, Bengaluru-560109, 
India. (Email: borrasurekha@gmail.com) 
 
R. Simon Sherratt, Fellow, IEEE, 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Reading, United Kingdom. (Email: 
r.s.sherratt@reading.ac.uk). 
 
 
Abstract—Deep learning has revolutionized the detection of diseases and is helping the healthcare sector 
break barriers in terms of accuracy and robustness to achieve efficient and robust computer-aided diagnostic 
systems. The application of deep learning techniques empowers automated AI-based utilities requiring 
minimal human supervision to perform any task related to medical diagnosis of fractures, tumors, and internal 
hemorrhage; preoperative planning; intra-operative guidance, etc. But deep learning faces some major threats 
to the flourishing healthcare domain. This paper traverses the major challenges that the deep learning 
community of researchers and engineers faces, particularly in medical image diagnosis, like the unavailability 
of balanced annotated medical image data, adversarial attacks faced by deep neural networks and 
architectures due to noisy medical image data, a lack of trustability among users and patients, and ethical and 
privacy issues related to medical data. This study explores the possibilities of AI autonomy in healthcare by 
overcoming the concerns about trust that society has in autonomous intelligent systems. 
 
Index Terms—Adversarial attacks, Computer-aided diagnostic systems, Convolutional neural network, 
Data augmentation, Deep learning, medical image analysis. 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) has become one of the most ground-breaking fields that has revolutionized 
healthcare [1], remote sensing [2], robotics [3], autonomous driving [4], and other interdisciplinary domains 
over the past decade. Over time, machine learning (ML) algorithms have been used by researchers and 
engineers to solve many biomedical tasks as well as simple data processing tasks [5, 6]. ML accomplishes a 
job by learning and utilizing previously obtained task-specific data. While machine learning algorithms excel 
when dealing with simple linear data, they do less well when handling complicated medical data [7]. Over 
time, deep learning, a subtype of AI has surpassed machine learning in the diagnosis of medical images [8], 
thanks to its improved accuracy, capacity for deep feature learning, and flexibility in tackling challenging 
diagnostic issues. However, the use of deep learning has been met with some difficulties, including the lack 
of annotated medical image data, lossy medical image data with attenuations and artefacts, user mistrust of 
deep learning-based tools like computer-aided diagnostic (CAD) systems, and ethical and privacy concerns 
regarding the data. Researchers and engineers are very concerned about these issues, given that they are 
hindering the advancement of deep learning in the medical field. 
 
Image artefacts and noise are considered adversarial attacks as they result in a biased and wrong prediction. 
While motion artefacts are common in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans [9], computed tomography 
(CT) scans frequently exhibit ring artefacts, beam-hardening, scatter artefacts, and metal artefacts [10]. 
Further, a blend of speckle, Poisson, and Gaussian noise is the most prevalent form of noise observed in 
radiological medical images like X-rays [11]. Deep learning practitioners in the medical domain must denoise 
image data manually to generate a clean dataset for training and testing. However, this procedure necessitates 
more time and space, which drives up the price of creating the CADs. 
 
While the availability of annotated medical image data is low, large datasets are required to train and 
validate robust deep learning architectures. The image labelling is a tedious task that requires supervision by 
medical professionals, making it expensive and time-consuming. This crunch in data generates a big 
challenge for training deep neural networks. Further, any imbalance in data for a particular class in the dataset 
could create a bias in the deep neural network, which could lead to overfitted prediction and diagnosis from 
the model. Modern deep learning techniques use representation learning algorithms to generate high volumes 
of medical images from a small medical image dataset [12, 13]. Although the artificial datasets generated 
after augmentation produce good results when training deep neural networks, a lack of trust towards these 
methods of data generation prevails in the community.  
 
Since deep learning models are typically “black box” algorithms, the public has a critical perspective on 
them. There are significant risks associated when a black box machine is employed as a diagnostic tool in 
healthcare facilities. Even though deep networks are frequently utilized by doctors and other medical experts, 
not everyone accepts the risk, which makes it difficult to trust these AI approaches. To increase user 
confidence and trust in CADs, it is imperative that the explainability of deep networks be thoroughly 
researched and made available to users.  
 
Privacy and ethical issues are great concerns that prevent the deep learning community from sharing 
medical image data in the open-source domain. It is estimated that by 2027, cloud computing in health care 
will be worth 89 billion US dollars [14], and to ensure the users' privacy and prevent counterfeiting, certain 
measures must be taken unless it is deemed to be open source. Medical data is protected by various 
international regulations in different nations. For instance, to prohibit the disclosure of sensitive patient health 
information without the knowledge or consent of the patient the United, States' Health Insurance Portability 

3 
 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 created national standards. Since patients' personally identifiable 
information is now legally protected, healthcare professionals are now compelled to secure, restrict the use 
of, and distribute it. Therefore, maintaining the secrecy of patient identity is one of the main responsibilities 
of deep learning engineers, which is challenging. The United Nations member states adopted the “Sustainable 
Development Goals” in 2015 with an aim to achieve 17 goals by 2030, with the third goal to "Ensure healthy 
lives and promote well-being for all at all ages." Healthcare and diagnosis in rural areas in some 
underdeveloped countries face a major barrier due to a lack of infrastructure. A disruption in healthcare of 
92% global member states of the UN was recorded during the pandemic [15]. It created havoc in the 
healthcare community, and the major pitfalls of manual, contact-based diagnosis were noticed by society. 
Proposals for contact-less diagnosis were achieved during the latter half of the pandemic using CADs. As a 
result, to achieve health supremacy, society must look up to and trust AI-based diagnostic systems. The shift 
from manual healthcare diagnosis to efficient CAD-based diagnostic systems could facilitate a major growth 
in the healthcare system by reducing diagnosis time, preventing erroneous diagnoses, and thus reducing 
mortality rates. The acceptance of AI based systems will help society accelerate in the domain of healthcare 
and therefore improve the quality of human life. 
 
The primary objective of our research was to explore and identify the challenges, explainability, 
trustability, and prospects of deploying deep learning algorithms to healthcare and medical image analysis. 
Specifically, in this paper, we consider: 
 
1) Adversarial attacks in deep networks due to attenuation.  
2) Unavailability of data and imbalanced data.  
3) Trust issues and explainability. 
4) Privacy and legal issues of medical data. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II explains the role of explainable AI (XAI) in the 
CAD systems related to healthcare. Section III provides the challenges of deep learning in healthcare. Section 
IV discusses the ethical principles and Section V concludes the paper. 
 
II. Deep Learning in Healthcare 
 
Healthcare organizations and facilities are gradually becoming more inclined toward the methods in which 
artificial intelligence can be used to diagnose diseases and treat patients. In the past several years, deep 
learning has revolutionized the ability of machines to analyze and handle data at a very high speed and with 
a precision that has never been achieved before. It is a hierarchical method that utilizes complex and deep 
structures and efficiently learns non-linear data with high accuracy and precision. Deep learning has been 
investigated in biological image processing, the diagnosis of illnesses, and the design of surgical systems for 
intraoperative and preoperative support, and the findings are encouraging. According to a survey [16] 
conducted in the US, people trust and are aware of AI in healthcare. A range of patient-facing healthcare 
technologies that allow individuals to communicate with clinicians and access their own medical information 
are highly acquainted with and used by more than half of patients (58%), according to the survey. The fact 
that 52% of people do trust AI for their medical requirements was also underlined. This shows that there is a 
pressing need to develop high-performance AI that solves a range of issues. 
 
 For artificial intelligence to grow in the healthcare industry, it is essential to comprehend medical data, 
discern techniques for processing it, and use the resulting CADs to provide precise and trustworthy findings. 

4 
 
A proper understanding of medical data is required to effectively use data and resources in the healthcare 
business and to deliver trustworthy outcomes. Fig. 1 represents a typical CAD system and its functionality 
of diagnosing medical image data or real time medical image time series data in surgical environment.  
 
 
Fig. 1. A general overview of a computer aided diagnostic system and how it tackles deep learning challenges. 
 
 
Once the deep learning model incorporated into the CAD is trained and perfected by deep learning 
engineers, the system takes the medical image as an input and generates the diagnosis prediction for the user. 
The CAD system is trained so that it is immune to adversarial attacks and attenuations. In the case of a very 
corrupted medical image, it could provide the user with an inconclusive result for the diagnosis. Inclusion of 
an XAI module in the CAD, as shown in Fig. 1, gives the user both a visual and a numerical explanation, 
upholding the user's faith and trust in the outcomes of the CADs. The models' internal workings and 
predictions are made openly available to be adequately interpretable by human analysts to develop trust in 
model predictions and find potential defects or limitations in the model. To support the expansion of CAD 
research, users contribute their own data to the healthcare facility's data storage cloud. The user has the option 
of reporting an incorrect diagnosis to the development team for evaluation. Further, to avoid misdiagnosis 
and to gain users' trust, CADs must be gradually retrained repeatedly based on real time data and thoroughly 
field tested before they are deployed into the medical industry. The performance should be assessed under 
the guidance of medical practitioners, whose expertise and supervision could be used to validate these AI-
based CADs, which would help them improve.  
 
 
 
 

2 
 
III. Challenges of Deep Learning in Healthcare 
 
A. Adversarial Attacks in Deep Networks due to Attenuation 
Deep neural networks, when subjected to noise, could produce misclassifications and erroneous results 
[17]. Medical image data is not devoid of noise and attenuations; it contains a wide variety of attenuations 
and motion artefacts. Multiplicative noise is often present in biomedical imaging, such as MRI, CT, 
ultrasound, and positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. The denoising varies the spatial and temporal 
distribution, and the medical image contrast so a substantial amount of detail is lost. If the AI systems are not 
well protected from malicious attacks, it might bring mistrust in AI among the common people. If any 
malicious third party tries to introduce any form of adversarial attack, the CADs must be prepared forehand 
to deal with them. Failure of being resistant to these attacks will make the users of the technology lose faith 
in the CADs. Linear algorithms fail in removing multiplicative noise which is signal dependent and is 
described mostly by complex Rayleigh and Gamma models. Further, since both noises and edges of medical 
images contain high frequencies, linear filters often do not provide sufficient performance when denoising. 
 
The removal of the artefacts poses a massive challenge to deep learning researchers, engineers, and 
biomedical professionals in the healthcare decision support system. In the early days of ML usage in 
healthcare industry, the image processing community engaged in developing pre-processing methods to root 
out these artefacts and attenuations in medical data. Liao et al. [18] presented a bilateral filter (CBF) that 
when applied to a smoother version of the image (context), suppresses the propagation of noise (PoN) and 
performs blind image denoising effectively. Bhonsle et al. [19] used bilateral filtering of MRI and X-ray 
images perturbed with additive Gaussian noise of different variances, and achieved better results than linear 
filtering methods like the Wiener filter, mean filter, etc. There has been a considerable amount of research 
exploring the use of deep learning for medical image denoising. Gondara [20] showed that denoising 
autoencoders using convolutional layer blocks can be used as effective denoising tools for medical imaging. 
The author showed that a small data volume containing about 300 samples can be sufficient to train the 
autoencoder and produce efficient denoising performance. Jifara et al. [21] proposed a residual learning 
approach along with batch normalization to learn the noise directly from noisy images. In recent years, 
adversarial training has become more effective in dealing with lossy data, and it does not manipulate the 
lossy data to produce results. A wide range of adversarial training methods using generative adversarial 
networks (GANs) [22] were explored by Yi et al. [23]. Although a fair amount of research has been conducted 
in the deep learning community related to adversarial training, very few studies have been implemented in 
the medical industry. The basic intuition behind adversarial training is that data is augmented by adversarial 
samples, which contain the general features of the noisy image data. The training data is enforced with 
accurate ground truth, and the network is trained so that in the event of an attack with noisy data, the deep 
network can be flexible to the attack and produce accurate results thereby improving user’s trust [24]. 
 
  B. Unavailability and Imbalanced Data  
An ideal medical image dataset should have the metadata, the identifier, and an adequate volume of images, 
be correctly annotated with ground truth by a medical professional and be reinforced with a proper license 
for distribution in the deep learning research community. Annotations and the data that is generated using 
imaging modalities are part of metadata. Medical images are indeed time-consuming and expensive to collect. 
There remains a scarcity of a large volume of authentic annotated medical image data, which prevents the 
growth of deep learning in medical image diagnosis. To compensate for the scarcity of medical image 
datasets, the generation of synthetic datasets has begun. This procedure is known as “image data 
augmentation,” which includes the generation of images from the original dataset by manipulation while 
keeping the important features of the image data preserved. The deep learning model considers the new image 
to be alien data but still increases the effective volume of the image dataset. There has been a substantial 
amount of research over the years on data augmentation techniques. Fig. 2 explores various state-of-the-art 

3 
 
image augmentation techniques, apart from the classical image manipulation methods that are widely used 
with deep learning methods. Basic image manipulation and augmentation techniques include image 
translation and flipping, jittering of image pixel intensity values, random cropping of images, random 
rotation, image shearing using affine transformation, adding Gaussian blur and noise, and color space 
transformation. 
 
Overfitting is a condition where the AI model associates itself closely with the training data and may not 
perform well when subjected to unseen data. It is usually experienced when the training data is small and not 
clean enough, i.e., when it contains noise. 
 
Image manipulation methods do not generate new images for that feature space, and since there is structural 
similarity with the original data, the deep learning model is overfitted for using the augmented data. To resolve 
this challenge, deep learning methods using autoencoders and generative adversarial networks (GANs) were 
implemented, which learned the features of the data for every different class of disease and generated synthetic 
images for the respective classes. A GAN contains two neural networks: a generator and a discriminator. While 
synthetic data is generated by the generator from random noise, the discriminator predicts if the data is real or 
synthetic. Both networks get better through training by trying to outperform each other in a min-max game. In a 
typical GAN-based augmentation, the generator is trained to generate synthetic medical image data by training it 
on a real medical image dataset. The image dataset, which is generated by the generator, is used to train or validate 
deep networks for medical diagnosis. 
 
Pix2pix [25], Pix2pixHD [26], SPADE [27], are some translations based GANs that translate images using 
masks that improve biological and medical coherence. While GANs like DCGAN [28] are flexible, the 
PGAN is good at generating high-resolution images. Data augmentation [29, 30] and patch extractions are 
often used with noise-based generation models when dealing with small datasets. 
 
Fig. 2. Different Image Augmentation approaches. 

4 
 
 
Sundaram and Hulkund [30] used GAN generated chest X-ray images to train and classify lung lesions, 
fractures, and pleural effusion categories. Bissoto et al. [31] used GAN-based augmentation to augment skin 
lesion medical images and studied the different synthetic data generated from different GANs. Their study 
revealed that for skin lesion image augmentation, StyleGAN 2 [32] outperformed other contemporary 
architectures in generating synthetic image data. Frid-Adar et al. [33] implemented the generation of 
augmented CT images for liver lesion classification. A convolutional neural network (CNN) trained on 
augmented data from the GAN outperformed the CNN trained on a real dataset, thus showing the 
improvement of the deep network by using augmentation.  
 
Conditional GANs are used by Kyuchkov et al. [34] on CT images to improve the reproducibility and 
detection probability of pulmonary nodules. For data augmentation, the model used an open-source CT-GAN 
network, Wasserstein loss, and adaptive instance normalization. Minne et al. [35] conducted experiments for 
a comparative analysis of the classical and GAN-based augmentation techniques to augment 3D MRI data to 
diagnose and treat Alzheimer’s disease and dementia. Zhang et al. [36] used a domain adaptation technique 
to overcome the unavailability of medical image data by segmenting medical images using meta-learning 
[37]. Singh et al. [38] proposed a “MetaMed” approach aiming to reduce computation and improve accuracy 
with small datasets. While there is a 2–5% improvement in generalization capability, 70% accuracy was 
obtained using the hybrid augmentation and regularization models when tested on three datasets: ISIC 2018, 
BreakHis, and Pap smear. While these are some recent encouraging findings made by deep learning 
researchers to tackle the challenge of data scarcity and variance, integrating patients’ trust information and 
trust propagation [39] with GANs while generating new samples improves the performance of recommender 
systems and patient’ trust.  
C. Trust Issues and Explainability 
Deep learning training algorithms are mathematically comprehensible, but their architectures and the 
complex mathematics behind them are more of a “black box” model. Thus, the prediction of deadly diseases, 
medical diagnosis for treatment, or surgical guidance using these AI methods raises ethical concerns for 
people. The public generally refuse to trust these CAD systems and their evaluations of the given data. As a 
result, the deep learning community in healthcare needs highly qualified individuals to create these deep 
learning-based diagnostic tools. 
Accuracy, precision, recall, and the F1 score are the standard metrics to evaluate a model’s performance in 
terms of classification 
 
(
) (
)
Accuracy= TP+TN
TP+FP+TN+FN  
 
 
(1) 
(
)
Specificity=TP
TP+FP  
 
 
 
 
(2) 
(
)
Sensitivity=TP
TP+FN  
 
 
 
 
(3) 
(
) (
)
F1score= 2*precision*recall
precision+recall  
(4) 
 
Where TP is true positive, FP is false positive, TN is true negative, and FN is false negative.  
 
It is important for the model to have strong F1, precision, and recall in addition to good accuracy. While 
sensitivity corresponds to the accurate identification of the diseased, specificity corresponds to the correct 
identification of people without disease. Since accuracy, precision, and other metrics usually estimate how 
well the model performed on the test set, they could be manipulated and changed to reflect different values. 
AI engineers could readily fabricate the data used to represent the model’s performance. As a result, users 
never have trust in the performance indicators of the model. This lack of trust led to the demand for XAI, 
which enables consumers to understand the predictions and diagnoses made by deep learning algorithms. 

5 
 
The wide breach of trust between the society and the black box deep learning models can be mended by 
implementing explainable deep learning in CADs. Unlike machine learning algorithms, deep learning 
handles visual information very explicitly, and visual explainability is more informative and captivating to 
the users than numerical quantifiers. Thus, for society to accept AI, visual explainability must be actively 
implemented in CAD systems. 
 
Research on the explainability of deep learning in medical imaging has been extensively conducted. 
Magesh et al. [40] studied the explainability of Parkinson’s disease prediction by CNNs on DaTscan 
(dopamine transporter scan) data using the Local Interpretable-Model Agnostic Explainer (LIME) method 
and produced encouraging results. In deep learning, to explain image classification tasks using CNN, guided 
backpropagation, gradient-based class activation maps (Grad-CAMs) [41], class activation maps (CAMs), 
and deconvolution techniques are used. These techniques generally fall into the category of “visual 
explanation” of deep learning methods. Cohen et al. [42] demonstrated the use of Grad-CAMs, CAMs, and 
heatmaps to localize infected regions in lungs of a COVID-19 patient to predict the opacity and extent of the 
disease and to produce an interpretable output. Successful experiments have been conducted by Gu et al. [43] 
using a comprehensive attention convolutional neural network and have achieved remarkable results in skin 
lesion segmentation and fetal MRI segmentation based on their explainability and disease localization. Fig. 
3 represents a plot of performance versus explainability for the various machine learning models, including 
deep learning models and Bayesian models.  
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Performance vs explainability plot for various machine learning, statistical learning, Bayesian learning 
and deep learning methods. 
 
1)  Model agnostic and model-specific explainability: Model agnostic XAI methods, by definition, are 
model or architecture independent and provide a high level of flexibility. Instead of developing a different 
evaluation method for a different model, it has been found that model agnostic methods produce praiseworthy 
results for different types of AI architectures and algorithms, from decision trees, support vector machines 
(SVM), nearest neighbor classifiers, logistic regression classifiers to some black-box methods like CNN. A 
reliable model-agnostic method that is approved by clinical experts and scientists can be used globally as a 
standard method. Once a model is standardized, it can be easily explained to the common people while 
comparing with other reliable methods to ensure the trustworthiness. For example, the users would find a 
linearly explainable algorithm or a visual representation more promising than statistical values that they 

6 
 
might not be aware of. Unlike model-agnostic methods, model-specific methods do not explain a large 
spectrum of deep learning models, although their explanations are much more specific than their model-
agnostic counterparts. For example, with GradCAM tool, using a method that is specific to visual data-based 
architectures like CNN, gradient maps can be generated. The pixels in the image responsible for a particular 
prediction can be described, which in turn is logically understandable by a human being. The deep learning 
research community has made significant efforts to bring model explainability tools to society. Tools such 
as LIME, SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), WIT (Whatif Tool), AI Explainability 360 toolset and 
Skater, are widely used to produce reports on a model's operation and attempt to explain the algorithm.  
2) Post hoc explainability: Post hoc explainability is a technique for analyzing a trained deep network to 
gain understanding of the learned mapping. The model-based and model-specific explanations are different 
from the post hoc explanation methods. The former train a deep network and then attempt to explain the 
pattern of predictions given by the black box deep network, whereas the latter try to make the deep network 
explainable by various modifications. 
D. Privacy and Legal Issues of Medical Data 
Medical data is one of the most valuable entities in the healthcare system; it contains all the valuable health-
related information of everyone who has ever been registered in a public or private medical facility for 
treatment or diagnosis. In recent years, medical data has been stored digitally, and the sharing of this data is 
protected by various laws. The Patient Data Protection Act, or Patientendaten-Schutz-Gesetz (PDSG), was 
passed by the German parliament (The Bundestag) in 2020 for the complete digitalization of the German 
healthcare system. Several database providers, organizations, and websites—including Harvard Dataverse, 
U.K. Biobank, Kaggle, and IEEE Dataport—have recently made medical data more accessible. They 
exchange licensed data that registered data scientists, machine learning, and deep learning programs can use. 
However, these medical databases can be compromised by external malicious software on the system, and 
antivirus programs and individuals demanding high cybersecurity measures like strong password policies, 
firewalls, and penetration testing. If malicious programs can steal the private health information, the patient 
might be subjected to harassment, cyberbullying, paranoia, or mental pain. Thus, the decision to disclose 
medical information rests with the data's owner, or the patient, who frequently expresses reluctance due to 
the data's confidentiality and integrity. Only a small percentage of patients volunteer to engage in various 
data gathering questionnaires and actively provide their medical information for study. For deep learning 
researchers and engineers, getting access to confidential medical data presents a significant challenge. To 
remedy such challenges, researchers could use techniques involving pseudonymized data or differential 
privacy rather than identified data [44]. Privacy audits can ensure patients trust, appropriate use, and security 
standards should guard against unauthorized use.  
 
 
IV. Ethical Principles, Opportunities and Future Research Directions  
 
The world of deep learning in medical image diagnosis faces the challenges discussed in the previous 
section, has created a divide between society and the deep learning community. The misunderstanding and 
suspicion that society has towards intelligent autonomous systems in healthcare and diagnosis hinders the 
autonomy of AI-based healthcare systems.  
 
Transparency, explainability, fairness, non-maleficence, accountability, or privacy are some of the ethical 
principles that may be used in the design of deep learning systems to alleviate patient concerns about data 
security, confidentiality, and integrity. Actions are required to address the ethical standards of AI at various 
organizational levels, and it should be a continuous process. The deployment of ethical AI involves several 
governance procedures that are not only technical, and there are many stakeholders involved. Risk 

7 
 
assessment, competence and knowledge building, stakeholder communication, cross-functional 
collaboration, data governance, IT governance, MLOps, and AI design are emerging practices. 
 
Competence and knowledge development, refers to a set of practices used to promote the abilities, 
expertise, and awareness necessary to implement ethical AI. Stakeholder communication refers to the set of 
communication practices organizations use to inform about their ethical AI practices, algorithms, or data. 
While the terms "AI design and development" and "data and AI governance" both refer to a set of operational 
decisions and practices that organizations use to address ethical concerns regarding the deployment, 
development, and use of AI systems, respectively, the former refers to the practical methods and practices 
that make up MLOps. 
 
Building responsible AI systems being prime importance, the deep learning engineers need to be careful 
while designing task-specific deep learning systems. The models need to be carefully assessed for various 
data and tasks through numerous performance tests and explainability assessments, while keeping the privacy 
of the data secure and avoiding any algorithmic bias caused by noisy data or foreign attacks. Further, robust 
software should be incorporated into the CADs, and they should undergo vigorous penetration testing [45]. 
 
The following are a few best practices for responsible AI systems to overcome the limitations of 
conventional AI in healthcare: 
 
a. Share information with the greater community, including research, tools, databases, and other resources. 
b. Create trustworthy and efficient user-centered AI systems while considering machine learning-specific 
issues. 
c. Keep an eye out for both long-term and short-term problems, estimate how the system will operate 
overall, and predict how users will react to future improvements. 
d. Update systems regularly, considering user input and real-time performance while maintaining a good 
balance between simple and optimal solutions. 
e. Conduct iterative integration and isolation tests on subsystems while considering a range of gold standard 
datasets, users, and use cases.  
f. Recognize the constraints imposed by the dataset and model while communicating the depth and breadth 
of the training to the users. 
g. Use a variety of indicators to understand the trade-offs between different errors and experiences.  
 
 
Tools that produce reports on a model's operation and attempt to explain it are known as "explainable AI 
frameworks." SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) is a model-independent approach that uses the shapley 
values from game theory to describe models. It illustrates how various features impact output or what role 
they play in the model's conclusion. LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) generates a 
list of explanations that show how each attribute affects a data sample's ability to predict the future. The 
Google-developed Whatif Tool (WIT) aids users in comprehending the operation of machine learning (ML) 
trained models, test performance regarding hypothetical scenarios, various data attributes, subsets of input 
data, and various machine learning fairness measures. IBM created the open-source AI Explainability 360 
toolset to enhance the explainability of datasets and the interpretability of ML techniques. Skater is a 
framework that aids in the creation of interpretable machine learning systems, which are typically 
implemented in real use cases. 
 
Potential opportunities of XAI in healthcare include but are not limited to maintenance and evolution in 
health care technologies, patient-specific health care, context-aware systems, robotic-assisted surgical 
procedure planning, medical image segmentation, targeted drug delivery, disease diagnosis and forecasting, 
treatment planning, basic and translational biomedical research, and survival analysis. 

8 
 
 
Although the study encompasses the challenges qualitatively, it does not consider the quantitative aspects 
of the demographics of different countries on continents where CADs could be implemented in healthcare. 
Many rural regions of the world do not have the facilities to implement such CADs, which causes a major 
restraint in achieving the supremacy of AI in healthcare. Future studies may examine the interactions between 
organizations involved in AI governance. The intersections of IT governance, data governance, and AI 
governance might be another area of future research. 
 
While the explainability of AI and adversarial training were previously unexplored topics in medical 
imaging, significant research in these areas has produced groundbreaking results. CADs implemented with 
responsible AI systems, secure data protection protocols, and explainable tools could help healthcare flourish 
in the most rural areas of the globe, where medical staff is scarce. As new regulations and AI legislation take 
effect, it will be interesting to see how different organizations continue to assess the risks and adopt the AI 
standards, certifications, and audits that are anticipated to occur in the future. 
 
V. Conclusion 
Although deep learning faces barriers in its growth in healthcare, the future holds big prospects for AI 
in healthcare, from classifying diseases to probing AI supervised robots to perform surgical tasks. The 
growth of deep learning in medical image diagnosis can be achieved only by restoring the faith of humans 
in AI through awareness. While it is very important to explain to the user how systems deliver the output, 
how the model is developed, and what the impact of the model is, the deep learning-based designs should 
also be adaptively fine-tuned, considering the quality degradations with respect to time. Apart from 
resolving AI explainability issues, the deep learning-based designs must be made transparent without 
compromising the user’s privacy and security and without any bias with respect to data collection, 
labelling, treatment, and model operations. Further, the technical, ethical, and societal factors of deep 
learning-based designs for medical image analysis can be optimized for better decision making and 
usability by combining responsible and XAI, which involves the complementing, co-creation, and 
coexistence of AI and humans.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Panesar, Machine learning and AI for healthcare. Springer, 2019. 
[2] 
J. E. Estes, C. Sailer, and L. R. Tinney, “Applications of artificial intelligence techniques to remote 
sensing,” The Professional Geographer, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 133–141, May 1986, doi: 10.1111/j.0033-
0124.1986.00133. x. 
[3] 
K. Rajan and A. Saffiotti, “Towards a science of integrated AI and robotics,” Artificial Intelligence, 
pp. 1–9, Jun. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2017.03.003. 
[4] 
S. Grigorescu, B. Trasnea, T. Cocias, and G. Macesanu, “A survey of deep learning techniques for 
autonomous driving,” J. Field Robotics, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 362–386, Apr. 2020, doi: 
10.1002/rob.21918. 
[5] 
C. Park, C. C. Took, and J.-K. Seong, “Machine learning in biomedical engineering,” Biomedical 
Engineering Letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–3, Feb. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s13534-018-0058-3. 
[6] 
K. R. Foster, R. Koprowski, and J. D. Skufca, “Machine learning, medical diagnosis, and biomedical 
engineering research-commentary,” Biomedical Engineering Online, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–9, Jul. 2014, 
doi: 10.1186%2F1475-925X-13-94. 
[7] 
G. 
Olague, 
S. 
Cagnoni, 
and 
E. 
Lutton, 
“Introduction 
to 
the 
special 

9 
 
issue 
on 
evolutionary 
computer 
vision 
and 
image 
understanding,” 
Pattern 
Recognition Letters, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1161–1163, Aug. 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2005.07.013. 
[8] 
C. Janiesch, P. Zschech, and K. Heinrich, “Machine learning and deep learning,” Electronic Markets, 
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 685–695, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s12525-021-00475-2. 
[9] 
J. D. Blumenthal, A. Zijdenbos, E. Molloy, and J. N. Giedd, “Motion artifact in magnetic resonance 
imaging: implications for automated analysis,” Neuroimage, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 89–92, May 2002, doi: 
10.1006/nimg.2002.1076. 
[10] F. E. Boas and D. Fleischmann, “CT artifacts: causes and reduction techniques,” Imaging in Medicine, 
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 229–240, Apr. 2012, doi: 10.2217/iim.12.13. 
[11] E. Manson, V. Ampoh, E. Fiagbedzi, J. Amuasi, J. Flether, and C. Schandorf, “Image noise in 
radiography and tomography: causes, effects and reduction techniques,” Current Trends in Clinical 
and Medical Imaging, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 86–91, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.19080/CTCMI.2019.02.555620. 
[12] M. Frid-Adar, E. Klang, M. Amitai, J. Goldberger, and H. Greenspan, “Synthetic data augmentation 
using GAN for improved liver lesion classification,” in Proc. ISBI, Washington, DC, USA, 2018, pp. 
289–293, doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2018.8363576. 
[13] D. Nie, R. Trullo, J. Lian, L. Wang, C. Petitjean, S. Ruan, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Medical image 
synthesis with deep convolutional adversarial networks,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 65, no. 12, 
pp. 2720–2730, Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2018.2814538. 
[14] A. Mehra, “Healthcare cloud computing market worth $89.4 billion by 2027”, 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/cloud-computing-healthcare.asp 
[15] United Nations, “Ensure heathy life and promote well-being for all ages,” Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs, Sustainable development. [Online]. Available: https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal3 
[16] Lisa 
Hedges, 
“Software 
advice 
healthcare 
tech 
survey,” 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.softwareadvice.com/resources/healthcare-technology-trends 
[17] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing 
properties 
of 
neural 
networks,” 
arXiv 
preprint 
arXiv:1312.6199, 
2013, 
doi: 
10.48550/arXiv.1312.6199. 
[18] Z. Liao, S. Hu, Z. Yu, and D. Sun, “Medical image blind denoising using context bilateral filter,” in 
Proc. MIACA, Guangzhou, China, 2010, pp. 12–17, doi: 10.1109/MIACA.2010.5528280.  
[19] D. Bhonsle, V. Chandra, and G. Sinha, “Medical image denoising using bilateral filter,” Int. J. Image, 
Graphics and Signal Processing, vol. 4, no. 6, p. 36, Jul. 2012, doi: 10.5815/ijigsp.2012.06.06. 
[20] L. Gondara, “Medical image denoising using convolutional denoising autoencoders,” in Proc. 
ICDMW, Barcelona, Spain. 2016, pp. 241–246, doi: 10.1109/ICDMW.2016.0041. 
[21] W. Jifara, F. Jiang, S. Rho, M. Cheng, and S. Liu, “Medical image denoising using convolutional 
neural network: a residual learning approach,” J. Supercomputing, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 704–718, Feb. 
2019, doi: 10.1007/s11227-017-2080-0. 
[22] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and 
Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 
63, no. 11, pp. 139-144, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1145/3422622. 
[23] X. Yi, E. Walia, and P. Babyn, “Generative adversarial network in medical imaging: A review,” 
Medical Image Analysis, vol. 58, p. 101552, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.media.2019.101552. 
[24] Chen, Honglong, Shuai Wang, Nan Jiang, Zhe Li, Na Yan, and Leyi Shi. "Trust‐aware generative 
adversarial network with recurrent neural network for recommender systems." International Journal 
of Intelligent Systems, vol.36, no. 2, pp.778-795, 2021, doi: 10.1002/int.22320 
[25] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial 
networks,” in Proc. CVPR, Honolulu, HI, USA, 2017, pp. 1125–1134, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.632.  
[26] T.-C. Wang, M.-Y. Liu, J.-Y. Zhu, A. Tao, J. Kautz, and B. Catanzaro, “High-resolution image 
synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional GANs,” in Proc. CVPR, Salt Lake City, UT, 
USA, 2018, pp. 8798–8807, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00917.  

10 
 
[27] T. Park, M.-Y. Liu, T.-C. Wang, and J.-Y. Zhu, “Semantic image synthesis with spatially-adaptive 
normalization,” in Proc. CVPR, Long Beach, CA, USA, 2019, pp. 2337–2346, doi: 
10.1109/CVPR.2019.00244.  
[28] A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional 
generative 
adversarial 
networks,” 
arXiv 
preprint 
arXiv:1511.06434, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.48550/arXiv.1511.06434. 
[29] Z. Hussain, F. Gimenez, D. Yi, and D. Rubin, “Differential data augmentation techniques for medical 
imaging classification tasks,” in Proc. AMIA Annual Symp., 2017, pp. 979–984. [Online]. Available: 
http://europepmc.org/article/MED/29854165. 
[30] S. Sundaram and N. Hulkund, “Gan-based data augmentation for chest x-ray classification,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2107.02970, 2021, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2107.02970. 
[31] A. Bissoto, E. Valle, and S. Avila, “Gan-based data augmentation and anonymization for skin-lesion 
analysis: A critical review,” in Proc. CVPRW, Nashville, TN, USA, 2021, pp. 1847–1856. doi: 
10.1109/CVPRW53098.2021.00204. 
[32] T. Karras, S. Laine, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, “Analyzing and improving the 
image quality of stylegan,” in Proc. CVPR, Seattle, WA, USA, 2020, pp. 8110–8119, doi: 
10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00813. 
[33] M. Frid-Adar, I. Diamant, E. Klang, M. Amitai, J. Goldberger, and H. Greenspan, “Gan-based 
synthetic medical image augmentation for increased CNN performance in liver lesion classification,” 
Neurocomputing, vol. 321, pp. 321–331, Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2018.09.013. 
[34] M. Kryuchkov, N. Khanzhina, I. Osmakov, and P. Ulyanov, “CT images GAN-based augmentation 
with AdaIN for lung nodules detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Machine Vision, Rome, Italy, 2021, vol. 
11605, pp. 628–635, doi: 10.1117/12.2587940 
[35] P. Minne, A. Fernandez-Quilez, D. Aarsland, D. Ferreira, E. Westman, A. W. Lemstra, M. T. Kate, A. 
Padovani, I. Rektorova, L. Bonanni, F. M. Nobili, M. G. Kramberger, J.-P. Taylor, J. Hort, J. Snædal, 
F. Blanc, A. Antonini, and K. Oppedal, “A study on 3D classical versus GAN-based augmentation for 
MRI brain image to predict the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease in a 
European multi-center study,” Medical Imaging 2022: Computer-Aided Diagnosis, vol. 12033. pp. 
624–632, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1117/12.2611339. 
[36] P. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Wang, and J. Pan, “Domain adaptation for medical image segmentation: a meta-
learning method,” J. Imaging, vol. 7, no. 2, p. 31, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.3390/jimaging7020031. 
[37] T. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey, “Meta-learning in neural networks: A 
survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05439, 2020, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2004.05439. 
[38] R. Singh, V. Bharti, V. Purohit, A. Kumar, A. K. Singh, and S. K. Singh, “Metamed: Few-shot medical 
image classification using gradient-based meta-learning,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 120, p. 108111, 
Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108111. 
[39] Ahmadian, Sajad, Milad Ahmadian, and Mahdi Jalili. "A deep learning-based trust-and tag-aware 
recommender 
system." Neurocomputing, 
vol. 
 488, 
pp. 
557-571, 
June 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.neucom.2021.11.064. 
[40] P. R. Magesh, R. D. Myloth, and R. J. Tom, “An explainable machine learning model for early 
detection of Parkinson’s disease using lime on datscan imagery,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, 
vol. 126, pp. 104041, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2020.104041. 
[41] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual 
explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization,” in Proc. ICCV, Venice, Italy, 2017, 
pp. 618–626, doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.74. 
[42] J. P. Cohen, L. Dao, K. Roth, P. Morrison, Y. Bengio, A. F. Abbasi, B. Shen, H. K. Mahsa, M. 
Ghassemi, H. Li, and T.Q. Duong “Predicting covid-19 pneumonia severity on chest x-ray with deep 
learning,” Cureus, vol. 12, no. 7, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.7759/cureus.9448. 
[43] R. Gu, G. Wang, T. Song, R. Huang, M. Aertsen, J. Deprest, S. Ourselin, T. Vercauteren, and S. Zhang, 
“Ca-net: Comprehensive attention convolutional neural networks for explainable medical image 

11 
 
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 699–711, Feb. 2021, doi: 
10.1109/TMI.2020.3035253. 
[44] D. Peters, K. Vold, D. Robinson, and R. A. Calvo, “Responsible AI—Two Frameworks for Ethical 
Design Practice,” IEEE Trans. Tech. and Soc., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 34–47, Mar. 2020, doi: 
10.1109/TTS.2020.2974991.  
[45] A. K. Ghosh and G. McGraw, “An approach for certifying security in software components,” in 
Proceedings of 21st NIST-NCSC National Information Systems Security Conference, 1998, pp. 42–
48, doi: 10.1007/11563228_27 
 
Tribikram Dhar has recently completed his B.S. in Electrical Engineering at Jadavpur 
University. His research interests are deep learning in biomedical image analysis, algorithm 
optimization and explainable AI.  
 
 
 
Nilanjan Dey (Senior Member, IEEE) received his PhD from Jadavpur University in 2015. 
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, Techno International New Town, Kolkata, India. He is also a visiting fellow 
of the University of Reading, UK and holds the position of Adjunct Professor at Ton Duc 
Thang University, Vietnam. Previously, he held an honorary position of Visiting Scientist 
at Global Biomedical Technologies Inc., CA, USA (2012–2015). Dr. Dey is the Editor-in-
Chief of the International Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence. He is the Series 
Co-Editor of Springer Tracts in Nature-Inspired Computing, Data-Intensive Research Series, Co-Editor of 
Advances in Ubiquitous Sensing Applications for Healthcare. He is an associate editor of IET Image 
Processing and editorial board member of Complex & Intelligent Systems, Springer. He is the Indian 
Ambassador of the International Federation for Information Processing – Young ICT Group.  
 
Surekha Borra (Senior Member, IEEE) received her PhD in 2015 from Jawaharlal Nehru 
Technological University, Hyderabad, India. She started her academic career as Assistant 
Professor in 2004 and served in various engineering colleges for 17 years. Currently, she is 
Professor in the Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, K. S. Institute 
of Technology, Bengaluru, India. Dr Borra’s research interests include Image and Video 
Analytics, Information Security and Signal Processing. She has received Woman 
Achiever’s Award from The Institution of Engineers (India) for her prominent research and 
innovative contributions, and several research grants from the Government of Karnataka, India.  
 
 
R. Simon Sherratt (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng. from Sheffield City Polytechnic in 
1992, both the M.Sc. in 1993, and Ph.D. in 1996 from The University of Salford. In 1996, 
he was appointed as a Lecturer in Electronic Engineering with the University of Reading, 
where he is currently a Professor of Biosensors. His research area is wearable devices, 
mainly for healthcare and emotion detection. Eur Ing Professor Sherratt was awarded the 1st 
place IEEE Chester Sall Award in 2004, 2nd place in 2014, 3rd place in 2015 and 3rd place in 
2016 for best papers in the IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. He is currently 
Chair of the IEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Technology Award.  
