O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E
O-MedAL: Online Active Deep Learning for
Medical Image Analysis
Asim Smailagic1
|
Pedro Costa3
|
Alex Gaudio1
|
Kartik Khandelwal1
|
Mostafa Mirshekari2
|
Jonathon
Fagert2
|
Devesh Walawalkar1
|
Susu Xu2
|
Adrian
Galdran3
|
Pei Zhang1
|
Aurélio Campilho3,4
|
Hae
Young Noh2
1Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh PA, USA
2Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh PA, USA
3INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
4Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto,
Portugal
Correspondence
Asim Smailagic, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
Email: asim@cs.cmu.edu
Funding information
This work was supported in part by the
European Regional Development Fund
through the Operational Programme for
Competitiveness and Internationalisation –
COMPETE 2020 Programme and in part by
the National Funds through the Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia under Project
CMUPERI/TIC/0028/2014.
Active Learning methods create an optimized labeled train-
ing set from unlabeled data. We introduce a novel Online
Active Deep Learning method for Medical Image Analysis.
We extend our MedAL active learning framework to present
newresultsinthispaper. Ournovelsamplingmethodqueries
the unlabeled examples that maximize the average distance
to all training set examples. Our online method enhances
performance of its underlying baseline deep network. These
novelties contribute signiﬁcant performance improvements,
including improving the model’s underlying deep network
accuracy by 6.30%, using only 25% of the labeled dataset to
achieve baseline accuracy, reducing backpropagated images
during training by as much as 67%, and demonstrating ro-
bustness to class imbalance in binary and multi-class tasks.
K E Y W O R D S
Active Learning, Online Learning, Deep Learning, Medical Image
Analysis
1
arXiv:1908.10508v2  [cs.LG]  27 Jul 2020

2
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
FIGUR E 1
Proposed Active Learning pipeline. To solve a supervised classiﬁcation task, we will use a deep network
(DN), an initial labeled dataset Dtr ain, an unlabeled dataset Dor acl e, and an oracle who can label data. We desire to
label as few examples as possible. Each active learning iteration, we use the DN to compute a feature embedding for all
labeled examples in Dtr ain and the top M unlabeled examples from Dor acl e with highest predictive entropy. We select
and label oracle examples furthest in feature space from the centroid of all labeled examples. The oracle examples are
selected one at a time, and the centroid updated after each labeling. We train the model on the expanded training set
and repeat the process. In the online setting, the model weights are not reset between iterations and we use only the
newly labeled examples and a subset of previously labeled examples.
INTRODUCTION
Active Learning (AL) is an emerging technique for machine learning that aims to reduce the amount of labeled training
data necessary for the learning task. AL techniques are sequential in nature, employing various sampling methods to
select examples from an unlabeled set. The selected examples are labeled and then used to train the model. A carefully
designed sampling method can reduce the overall number of labeled data points required to train the model and make
the model robust to class imbalances Ertekin et al. (2007) or implicit bias Richards et al. (2011) in the dataset.
AL assumes the training process requires labeled data, and secondly that data is costly to label. Medical image
analysis is particularly well framed by these assumptions, as the domain offers many opportunities for machine learning
solutions, and labeling medical images requires extensive investment of time and effort by trained medical personnel. In
particular, AL can be especially useful in the context of deep learning for medical image analysis, where deep networks
typically require large labeled training datasets (Litjens et al., 2017).
We introduce MedAL in our prior work. MedAL is a novel AL approach to optimize the selection of unlabeled
samples by combining predictive entropy based uncertainty sampling with a distance function on a learned feature
space (Smailagic et al., 2018). MedAL’s active sampling mechanism minimizes the required labels by selecting only those
unlabeled images that are most informative to the model as it trains.
However, MedAL does not address improving computational efﬁciency. Each time new labeled examples are added
to the training set, MedAL resets the model weights and re-trains the model using all available labeled data. As a result,

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
3
the method processes training examples many more times than necessary, increasing the time between each sampling
step. In a real world application, the trained medical personnel labeling the data would need to wait for the model to
ﬁnish training, reducing the interactivity and applicability of the system.
To improve the computational performance of MedAL, we introduce “Online” MedAL (O-MedAL) which trains the
model incrementally by using only the new set of labeled data and a subset of previously labeled data. By minimizing
the training data used in each AL iteration, O-MedAL is computationally faster and more accurate than the original
baseline model while retaining all the beneﬁts of MedAL. MedAL is experimentally validated on three medical image
diagnosis tasks and modalities: diabetic retinopathy detection from retinal fundus images, breast cancer grading from
histopathological images, and melanoma diagnosis from skin images. O-MedAL is compared to MedAL on the retinal
fundus image dataset for diabetic retinopathy detection. To the best of our knowledge, online active learning has never
been directly applied to a medical image analysis setting, and it has never been applied to a deep learning setting. In fact,
there is little prior work on online active learning. We discuss existing approaches and their drawbacks in the Related
Work section.
Our main contributions are:
•
Novelty: we present a novel AL sampling method that queries the unlabeled examples maximally distant to the
centroid of all training set examples in a learned feature space.
•
Accurate: we introduce an online training technique that is more accurate than the original baseline model trained
on a fully labeled dataset.
•
Data Efﬁcient: our method achieves better results with fewer labeled examples than competing methods.
•
Computationally Efﬁcient: online training signiﬁcantly reduces training time and the required number of backpropa-
gated examples. We also reduce the sampling method runtime from quadratic to linear.
•
Robust: our active learning method performs well on binary and multi-class classiﬁcation problems as well as
balanced and unbalanced datasets.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in the Related Work section, we discuss relevant prior work
on active and online learning approaches. In the Proposed Method section, we describe the sampling process and
online training technique. In the Experiments section, we present results comparing MedAL to common active learning
approaches on three medical image datasets. We also present results comparing O-MedAL to MedAL. Finally, we
discuss the implications of the results and future directions, and we provide conclusions summarizing our work.
RELATED WORK
Most AL systems approach the challenge of labeling data by selecting unlabeled examples likely to improve predictive
performance. The AL scenario assumes that an oracle can assign a label to the selected examples. In practice, the
process of labeling data can be difﬁcult, time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, it is valuable to design sampling
methods that identify the unlabeled examples most informative to the learning task while querying as few labels as
possible.
AL was applied to histopathological image analysis on unbalanced data (Homeyer et al., 2012), cell nucleus segmen-
tation (Wen et al., 2018), CT scan and MRI analysis (Pace et al., 2015), and computer-aided diagnosis of masses in digital
mammograms (Zhao et al., 2018). An AL uncertainty sampling method was created for skin lesion segmentation (Górriz
et al., 2017). Additionally, AL was used in a Multiple Instance Learning framework for tuberculosis detection of chest
radiographies (Melendez et al., 2016).

4
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
The main AL scenarios include membership query synthesis, pool-based active learning and stream-based active
learning. In membership query synthesis, the learner generates an unlabeled input and queries its label (Angluin, 2004).
In pool-based active learning, a pool of unlabeled instances is ranked and the top k subset is labeled (Settles, 2008).
Stream-based active learning assumes a stream of unlabeled data and the learner decides on-the-ﬂy whether to label it
(Dasgupta et al., 2008).
The sample/query mechanisms mainly include Query By Committee (QBC) (Freund et al., 1997, 1993), Expected
Error Reduction (EER) (Cohn et al., 1995; Melville and Mooney, 2004), Expected Model Change (EMC) (Cai et al., 2013;
Freytag et al., 2014), and Uncertainty Sampling (US) (Yang et al., 2015; Lewis and Catlett, 1994; Lewis and Gale, 1994).
Our work mainly expands on pool-based active learning and US. US is a sampling technique to select and label the
unlabeled examples the model is most uncertain about. Uncertainty can by computed by predictive entropy, or the
entropy of a prediction p( ˆx |x) given an unlabeled input example x. US selects unlabeled examples near the classiﬁcation
boundary without making use of labels. Building on the US technique, we propose to sample unlabeled examples
maximally dissimilar to the training set examples.
The work of (Zhang et al., 2018) proposed a pool-based active learning method for highly imbalanced data. The
method automatically pseudo-labels similar examples that have high conﬁdence, and it asks an expert to label examples
most similar to rare classes and dissimilar to examples from the common class. This work complements ours nicely, with
key differences. We sample only the most distant examples across all classes, and we incorporate predictive entropy
of the classiﬁer model into the active sampling method. While (Zhang et al., 2018) trains two distinct deep networks,
we train just one deep network, which is more efﬁcient. To start the active learning process, their method uses a large
initial dataset in which an expert has already labeled many images. In contrast, our method performs well with an initial
dataset of just one labeled example. We additionally introduce an online learning sampling method to gain further
improvements in performance and efﬁciency, whereas their work focuses on only the active sampling part.
Regarding online active learning, some prior works exist. The work of (Murugesan and Carbonell, 2017) proposes a
multi-task learning algorithm to minimize labeling requests by attempting to infer a label with high conﬁdence from
other tasks rather than ask the oracle for the label. The work of (Sculley, 2007) addresses a setting where the algorithm
requests a label immediately after an example has been classiﬁed; the method reduces the computational cost simply
because it requires less labels. The work of (Baram et al., 2003) proposes an multi-arm bandits method where learners
are selected from the ensemble to sample the next example to be labeled. The reward function for the bandits problem is
classiﬁcation entropy maximization. In some cases, the approach has better performance than other ensemble methods
evaluated.
More recently, (Zhou et al., 2017) propose an online AL method for biomedical image analysis. This work presents
an active and incremental learning method for medical image data. While classical AL methods retrain the entire model,
in this work a deep convolutional network is continuously ﬁne-tuned at each AL iteration. We generalize and further
improve the online incremental training approach by sampling a random subset of the entire labeled dataset at each AL
iteration. Our results and analysis show that using a random subset of the labeled data is more efﬁcient and achieves
better overall performance than using the full dataset for continuous ﬁne tuning.
PROPOSED METHOD
AL techniques developed for classical machine learning methods are not ideal for Deep Neural Network (DNN) architec-
tures. In particular, (Zhang et al., 2016) shows DNNs are capable of ﬁtting a random labeling of the training data with
low uncertainty. These ﬁndings suggest that traditional AL sampling methods based on predictive uncertainty will be
less effective with DNNs.

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
5
We present a method speciﬁcally tailored to DNNs. We ﬁrst describe our novel AL sampling method and then we
show how to train the system using online learning.
|
Sampling Based on Distance between Feature Embeddings
As shown in Figure 1, let Dtr ain be the initial training set of labeled examples and Dor acl e be the unlabeled dataset. We
train a model using Dtr ain and then use the model to ﬁnd a ﬁxed number of the most informative unlabeled examples,
x∗∈Dor acl e. These examples are then labeled and added to Dtr ain and the model is trained on the new data. Oracle
examples are iteratively labeled in this fashion until the oracle set is exhausted or sufﬁcient performance is attained.
Uncertainty-based methods for choosing x∗∈Dor acl e evaluate about how informative a given x ∈Dor acl e is by
computing the uncertainty in the model’s prediction. In this work, we depart from the standard practice of only using
the model’s prediction to choose x∗. Instead, we propose to use a feature embedding function f (x) ∈Òn in conjunction
with uncertainty.
In particular, we ﬁrst compute the predictive entropy of each unlabeled example in Dor acl e and then we select
only the top M highest entropy examples as a set CM . Using this subset of Dor acl e reduces the number of examples
considered and ensures the active learning process ultimately selects unlabeled examples closest to the decision
boundary.
CM = {x|x ∈Dor acl e, is_topM(entropy(model(x)))}.
(1)
To further evaluate the amount of new information an unlabeled example, x ∈CM , can add to the training set, we
evaluate each example’s average distance in feature space to each labeled example xi ∈Dtr ain by means of a feature
embedding function f and a distance function d.
s(x) = 1
N
N
Õ
i=1
d(f (xi ), f (x)),
(2)
where xi ∈Dtr ain, x ∈CM , f (x) is the feature embedding function and d(a, b) is a Euclidean distance function.
We calculate s(x) for every example in CM ⊂Dor acl e, then ask the oracle to label the example that maximizes s
and add the example to Dtr ain. We repeat this process to select a ﬁxed number of examples from CM .
x∗= arg max
x∈CM
s(x).
(3)
Finally, we train the model on the new data and repeat the sampling process over again.
The original MedAL paper(Smailagic et al., 2018) evaluateda variety of distance functions and foundempirically that
Euclidean distance and cosine distance yielded the highest and second highest entropy, respectively, when classifying a
random subset of unlabeled examples. While this evidence suggests either metric is suitable choice for d, we choose
Euclidean distance.
The following proof shows that using Euclidean distance reduces the computation of s(x)[x ∈CM from a pairwise
distance matrix between examples in Dor acl e and Dtr ain (which is O(M N ) operations) to a simple distance of each
unlabeled point to the centroid of labeled examples (which is O(M ) operations), thereby gaining a quadratic to linear
speedup in each AL iteration. This speedup makes O-MedAL tractable for larger datasets, particularly if there are
already many labeled examples (such as in later AL iterations). A drawback still remains that the method depends on

6
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
computing feature embeddings, f (x), for each unlabeled example, which can be expensive. We also do not know if the
linear speedup is possible with cosine distance.
Theorem 1 In any AL iteration, the unlabeled example x∗∈CM can be found with O(M ) evaluations of the Euclidean distance
function d.
First, note that the embeddings of examples x ∈CM and examples xi ∈Dtr ain are points in high dimensional space
f (x) ∈Òd . If we assume the space is Euclidean, then the embeddings of examples in Dtr ain have a centroid deﬁned
by the average of each coordinate: y = [y (1), . . . , y (d)] = [ 1
N
ÍN
i=1 f (xi )(1), . . . , 1
N
ÍN
i=1 f (xi )(d)], where superscript (j )
denotes the j th coordinate.
Second, notethatthescalarscores(x)foranygivenexamplex ∈CM canbefoundexactlybyevaluatingd(f (x), f (xi ))
for all xi ∈Dtr ain. The score permits an ordering of examples in CM , and therefore we can ﬁnd x∗= arg maxx∈CM s(x).
However, evaluating each score exactly is unnecessary. We can use only the knowledge of the ordering to ﬁnd the maxi-
mum; we do not need the speciﬁc scores s(x). To this end, we introduce an operator φrank ⟨.⟩which returns the index of
the given element in an array sorted from smallest to largest. Clearly, x∗= arg maxx∈CM s(x) = arg maxx∈CM φrank ⟨s(x)⟩
We now prove that the ordering of examples x ∈CM is preserved when s(x) = d(f (x), y), where d is Euclidean
distance and y is the centroid of embeddings for elements in Dtr ain.
φrank ⟨s(x)⟩= φrank ⟨d(f (x), y)⟩
(4)
φrank
*
1
N
N
Õ
i=1
v
u
u
t d
Õ
j
 f (xi )(j ) −f (x)(j )2
+
= φrank
*v
u
u
t d
Õ
j
 
f (x)(j ) −1
N
N
Õ
i=1
f (xi )(j )
!2+
(5)
In one dimension, an ordering is preserved through any uniform stretching or shrinking of a number line. We deﬁne
the following properties of an ordered variable z ∈Ò and scalar constant c: φrank ⟨z ⟩= φrank ⟨z + c⟩= φrank ⟨cz ⟩.
Furthermore, if z ≥0, then φrank ⟨z ⟩= φrank

√z

=⇒φrank

Í √z

= φrank ⟨Í z ⟩. We can use these properties to
simplify both sides of Eq. (5) by considering z = f (x)(j ) and then removing the square root and constant terms.
φrank
* N
Õ
i=1
d
Õ
j

f (xi )(j ) −f (x)(j )2
+
= φrank
* d
Õ
j
 
f (x)(j ) −1
N
N
Õ
i=1
f (xi )(j )
!2+
(6)
φrank
* N
Õ
i=1
d
Õ
j

f (xi )(j )2
+

f (x)(j )2
−2f (x)f (xi )
+
= φrank
*
1
N 2
d
Õ
j
"
Nf (x)(j ) −
N
Õ
i=1
f (xi )(j )
#2+
(7)
φrank
* N
Õ
i=1
d
Õ
j

f (x)(j )2
−2f (x)f (xi )
+
= φrank
* d
Õ
j
N
"
N

f (x)(j )2
−2f (x)(j )
N
Õ
i=1
f (xi )(j )
#
+
d
Õ
j
 N
Õ
i=1
f (xi )(j )
!2+
(8)
= φrank
* d
Õ
j
N
Õ
i=1

f (x)(j )2
−2f (x)(j )f (xi )(j )
+
.
(9)
The right and left sides are equivalent, which proves the ordering is preserved when using the distance to the
centroid of the labeled examples. It follows that x∗= arg maxx∈CM φrank ⟨d(f (x), y)⟩is a valid score function and can be
computed with O(M ) distance function evaluations.

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
7
In following sections, we will describe in detail the feature embedding function f (x), and speciﬁcally how we train
the model with new labels.
|
Deep Representations as Feature Embeddings
We train a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based architecture to extract powerful representations from the data
and simultaneously solve the image classiﬁcation problem. When interpreted in metric space, the feature embeddings
learned by CNNs are known to encode semantic meaning. In particular, nearby elements tend to be visually similar
(Mikolov et al., 2013; Costa et al., 2018), and conversely, elements that are far away tend to be visually different. We
therefore make the assumption that images with mostly similar features will have a smaller distance in embedding space,
while images with mostly different features will have a larger distance. The assumption that the feature embedding can
be interpreted in metric space is the basis for Eq. (2).
As shown in Figure 1, we deﬁne the feature embedding function, f (x) ∈Òn, as the activations of a particular CNN
layer. Since f (x) is tied to the model, it evolves during training. As the model performance improves, the model will
extract better representations, leading to better classiﬁcation accuracy as well as more informative examples sampled
from Dor acl e. If f (x) was statically deﬁned, the function could be computed off-line and the model reduces to a simple
predictive entropy based sampling method.
|
Online Active Learning
The online learning technique describes how we train the model given a stream of newly labeled examples generated
by the AL sampling method. Online MedAL (O-MedAL) introduces a few changes to MedAL. First, while MedAL re-
initializes the model parameters each AL iteration, O-MedAL maintains the parameters at each new AL iteration and
incrementally updates the model. This change enables signiﬁcant computational savings because while MedAL re-trains
the model once per AL iteration, O-MedAL trains just one model across all AL iterations, and the total number of epochs
used to train the model can be an order of magnitude smaller. Second, MedAL trains the model using the full training set
Dtr ain, while O-MedAL trains on the newly labeled items and a random subset of previously labeled items. We have
found empirically that including a non-null subset of previously labeled data is necessary, and we discuss further in
the Discussion section. Using a subset of available training data also reduces the overall number of examples used to
train the model. Both of these changes result in computational efﬁciency. The ﬁrst change reduces the total number of
epochs required to train the model while the second change reduces the number of examples per epoch.
The number of examples that will be used to update model weights during backpropagation increases exponentially,
and can be expressed using the equation:
Nt =
tÕ
i=1
Ei [ℓ+ p |Dtr ain |i−1]
where
|Dtr ain |i−1 = |Dtr ain |0 + (i −1)ℓ,
(10)
where Nt is the cumulative number of example images used for backpropagation after t AL iterations, ℓis the number of
images labeled each AL iteration, p ∈[0, 1] is the hyperparameter determining the fraction of previously labeled dataset
to use, |Dtr ain |i−1 is the number of labeled examples in the previous AL iteration and Ei is the number of epochs at the
i th AL iteration. |Dtr ain |0 is the initial number of labeled examples; for O-MedAL, |Dtr ain |0 = 1. The equation is useful
to estimate the number of images processed by backpropagation. It can also be used to estimate how many times an

8
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
O-MedAL model’s parameters have been updated after any given AL iteration; in this case, the cumulative number of
weight updates will be Nt /b, where b is the minibatch size.
EXPERIMENTS
We perform experiments on three medical datasets to validate the accuracy and robustness of our proposed approach.
First, we introduce the datasets. Next, we describe MedAL and online MedAL implementation details. Then, we evaluate
our sampling method on the three datasets. Last, we evaluate our online training approach.
|
Dataset Description
No DR
DR
Benign
Malignant
Normal
Benign
In situ
Invasive
FIGUR E 2
Examples from all three datasets evaluated in this work. From left to right, top to bottom: Messidor,
Skin Cancer and Breast Cancer datasets. The class labels are shown bellow each of the images.
Active learning reduces the amount of labeled data necessary for training, and it is therefore well positioned medical
image analysis. We evaluate MedAL on three publicly available datasets. Figure 2 presents representative images in
these datasets.
Messidor Dataset contains 1200 eye fundus images from 654 diabetic and 546 healthy patients collected from
three hospitals in France, we believe between 2005 and 2006. This dataset was labeled for Diabetic Retinopathy (DR)
grading and for Risk of Macular Edema. We use Messidor to classify eye fundus images as healthy (DR grade = 0) or
diseased (DR grade > 0).
Breast Cancer Diagnosis Dataset, originally presented in the ICIAR 2018 Grand Challenge (Aresta et al., 2019),
consists of 400 high resolution images of breast tissue cells evenly split into four distinct classes: Normal, Benign, in-situ
carcinoma and invasive carcinoma (100 images per class).
Skin Cancer dataset contains 900 cell tissue images classiﬁed as either benign or malignant (Gutman et al., 2016).
The dataset is unbalanced, with 80% benign examples and 20% positive examples. MedAL makes possible the following
class balancing technique: in each AL iteration, we query additional malignant training examples by making use of

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
9
Parameters
Messidor
Breast Cancer
Skin Cancer
(train + oracle) size
768
320
700
validation set size
240
0
0
test set size
192
80
200
|Dtr ain |0 - Initial training set size
100
30
100
ℓ- Imgs labeled each AL iter
20
5
10
M - Num max entropy samples
50
30
50
TABL E 1
MedAL Implementation Details. Showing dataset size and values of parameters used.
randomized preprocessing techniques.
|
MedAL Implementation
The underlying convolutional neural network architecture is Inception V3 (Szegedy et al., 2016), with weights pre-
trained on ImageNet. We replace the top layer with Global Average Pooling and then a Fully-Connected layer, where
the number of hidden units corresponds to the number of output classes in the dataset. We use Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2014) optimizer with learning rate of 2e −4 and we use the default recommended values for β1 (0.9) and β2 (0.999).
At the start of each AL iteration, we reset the model’s weights the initial starting values (after pre-training on
ImageNet). The top layer weights, since they were not pre-trained on ImageNet, are randomly initialized using the
Glorot method (Glorot and Bengio, 2010).
Each AL iteration, we train the model until it reaches 100% training accuracy. We perform hyperparameter selection
using only the Messidor validation set and we apply these same hyperparameters to the Skin Cancer and Breast Cancer
datasets in order to avoid using a labeled validation set for these datasets. The ability to avoid using a validation set
is important to show both robustness of our method and to show that our method minimizes the number of labeled
images used. Table 1 shows the dataset size and the speciﬁc hyperparameters that were different across the datasets.
We follow the ORB initialization method described in (Smailagic et al., 2018) to create the initial training set Dtr ain.
For data pre-processing, we resize all images to 512 × 512 pixels and use the following dataset augmentation: 15 degree
random rotation, random scaling in the range [0.9, 1], and random horizontal ﬂips.
To conﬁgure the AL sampler, we use the Euclidean distance function, and we obtain feature embeddings from the
Mixed5 layer of Inception V3. These choices are a result of our prior empirical evidence that this combination of layer
and distance function achieves the highest entropy (Smailagic et al., 2018).
|
Online Active Learning (O-MedAL) Implementation
We start with the conﬁguration deﬁned in the MedAL Implementation Details section, and then make the following
changes.
First, we replace the Inception V3 network with a ResNet18 network (He et al., 2015) pre-trained on ImageNet.
ResNet18 performs nearly as well as Inception V3 on the fully labeled dataset, and ResNet18 is a smaller model. Since
one of the reasons to consider O-MedAL is computational efﬁciency, we decided to use ResNet18. We use the SGD

10
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
optimizer with a Nesterov momentum of 0.9, learning rate of 0.003, weight decay of 0.01. The batch size is 48. We
replace the last layer with a linear layer followed by Sigmoid. The feature embeddings are extracted from the output of
the "layer 2" layer. We consider ResNet18 converged on Messidor at 80 epochs. ResNet18 with these hyperparameters
is the network used for all O-MedAL evaluation experiments.
Second, regarding Messidor, we use an 80/20 random split stratiﬁed across hospitals. The split is re-computed
each time a model is trained. It assigns 949 images to the combined train and oracle sets, and the remaining 238 images
to the test set. For these tests, we also correct the published errata associated with Messidor’s dataset (this includes
removal of 13 duplicate images from one of the hospitals).
We use the same pre-processing transformations used for MedAL evaluation, and we also use the same hyperpa-
rameters for Messidor; the number of max entropy samples is M = 50 and images added per iteration is ℓ= 20. For
results described in the O-MedAL Evaluation section, we do not use ORB initialization for MedAL or O-MedAL models,
and more speciﬁcally, |Dtr ain |0 = 1 randomly sampled and labeled image.
Third, we introduce a hyperparameter, p ∈[0.0, 1.0], that determines at any given AL iteration what percent of
previously labeled examples in Dtr ain should be used to train the model. The same images are used for all epochs
in a given AL iteration. This parameter is the independent variable of our O-MedAL experiments. It was previously
described in Equation 10.
Fourth, since the method is online, we do not reset the weights of the model at the start of each AL iteration.
Fifth, for the O-MedAL evaluation, O-MedAL and MedAL models identiﬁed by a patience parameter are trained for
at most 150 epochs per AL iteration, with an early stopping patience of 5, 10 or 20. O-MedAL models that do not specify
patience are trained for a ﬁxed 10 epochs per AL iteration.
Last, we rewrite the code in a new implementation, migrating from Keras to PyTorch. The new code is available
online at https://www.github.com/adgaudio/O-MedAL.
|
Distance-based Sampling Method Evaluation
We compare the performance of our AL sampling method on the three datasets mentioned above to the performance of
uncertainty sampling and random sampling. The datasets each present different learning challenges: Messidor as a
balanced binary classiﬁcation, the Breast Cancer dataset as a balanced multi-class classiﬁcation, and the Skin Cancer
dataset as an unbalanced binary classiﬁcation. After each AL iteration, the test accuracy of our model is evaluated.
Our method consistently outperforms both uncertainty and random sampling on all three datasets, as shown
in Figure 3. Random sampling chooses images uniformly at random, and therefore on balanced datasets, we expect
accuracy to increase in a nearly linear fashion. Any improvement over random sampling will choose more informative
images earlier in the sampling process, resulting in a non linear curve. MedAL shows large increases in accuracy with
fewer images. For instance, on Messidor, Figure 3a shows our method obtains 80% accuracy with 425 images, whereas
uncertainty sampling and random sampling require 625 and 700 images, respectively, to achieve the same 80% accuracy.
Moreover, our method obtains results comparable to the baseline accuracy using only 650 of 768 training images
(84.6%).
As shown in Figure 3b, our method is also consistently better than competing methods in the Breast Cancer dataset,
although the difference is not as striking as in Messidor. Our approach reaches 82% accuracy with 230 of 320 (76.9%)
images labeled, whereas uncertainty sampling and random sampling require 250 and 255 images, respectively, to
achieve the same accuracy.
Finally, our approach also reaches 69% accuracy on the Skin Cancer dataset with 460 images labeled, as shown in
Figure 3c, whereas uncertainty sampling and random sampling require 570 and 640 labeled training images, respectively,

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
11
(a) Messidor: Test Accuracy.
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
Baseline Accuracy on entire dataset
[320 images] (84.51%)
Random sampling
Entropy measure
Our method
Accuracy
(b) Breast Cancer: Test Accuracy.
(c) Skin Cancer: Test Accuracy.
(d) Skin Cancer: Test AUC.
FIGUR E 3
MedAL outperforms competing methods by obtaining better performance with fewer labeled training
images. Figures (a), (b) and (c) show that MedAL outperforms random sampling and uncertainty sampling (entropy
measure) by consistently obtaining better test set accuracy as the size of the training set increases. Figure (d) shows
that MedAL outperforms a Deep Bayesian AL method (Gal et al., 2017) in terms of Area Under the ROC curve.
to achieve the same results. Furthermore, our method achieves baseline accuracy of 71% after being trained with 610 of
700 images (87%).
MedAL’s consistently superior performance on the Breast and Skin Cancer datasets show that the distance based
sampling method is robust to different properties in the given unlabeled dataset. In particular, we show robustness to
balanced and imbalanced class distributions for binary and multi-class classiﬁcation tasks.
|
Online Active Learning (O-MedAL) Evaluation
We evaluate O-MedAL by comparing it to MedAL and the ResNet18 baseline across three areas: test set accuracy,
percent dataset labeled and computational efﬁciency. In particular, we conduct a study to determine whether previously
labeled data is useful or necessary to train the model. Results show that the online approach signiﬁcantly improves over
the baseline in all three areas.
We train O-MedAL nine times independently, varying p, the percent of previously labeled images to include in any
particular AL iteration. The nine values we consider are p ∈{0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, 1.0}. These
models all have a ﬁxed 10 epochs per AL iteration. We further evaluate the p = 0.125 and p = 0.875 models using
patience of 5, 10 and 20, as these two values of p were best performing.
Figure 4 shows the test accuracy (y-axis) as a function of percent dataset labeled (x-axis) for one O-MedAL (red
line) and one MedAL model (green line). Percent dataset labeled is directly proportional to AL iteration. Within an AL
iteration, we compute test accuracy after each epoch. Therefore, the x axis can equivalently be labeled with a sequence

12
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
2
10
21
31
42
52
63
75
88
100
Percent Dataset Labeled
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Test Accuracy
MedAL (patience=20)
Online MedAL (p=0.875, patience=10)
ResNet18 (max accuracy)
FIGUR E 4
O-MedAL vs. MedAL Mechanics O-MedAL (red) preserves the labeling efﬁciency of MedAL (green)
with less computation and higher accuracy, showing robustness to imbalance in the unlabeled data, Dor acl e.
of the form (AL iteration, epoch). The dashed blue line is the baseline ResNet18 highest test accuracy (85.71%).
The plot exposes key details of MedAL’s learning process. MedAL (green line) resets the weights of the model
at each AL iteration and then trains for up to 150 epochs (subject to early stopping). The model starts at the same
initialization (with 49.58% test accuracy) and spends time redundantly re-learning the same features to regain the
accuracy of the former AL iteration.
If MedAL converges before 100% of dataset is labeled, it effectively re-trains the baseline model multiple times.
Assuming overﬁtting does not decrease test accuracy, we can expect the model’s max accuracy to have exceeded the
baseline accuracy due to random chance. The results of Figure 4 conﬁrm MedAL exceeded baseline accuracy. An
improvement in accuracy over MedAL’s highest accuracy is thus a signiﬁcant improvement over the baseline. Secondly,
we also see that the MedAL curve reaches baseline accuracy when approximately 61% of the dataset is labeled, which
is slightly better than our previous tests on MedAL with Inception V3. Possible reasons for this improvement are (a)
different dataset (the Messidor train set is larger, train and test sets are stratiﬁed across hospitals and the duplicate
images removed), (b) not using ORB initialization, (c) a larger patience value (patience=20), (d) different implementation
(PyTorch vs Keras).
The red lines of Figure 4 represent our second most accurate O-MedAL model, which uses p = 0.875, or 87.5%
of previously labeled data at each AL iteration, and has early stopping (patience = 10). Each small vertical red line
represents the epochs of one AL iteration. The lines are separated in order to visually align O-MedAL epochs to the
MedAL epochs at each AL iteration. We can see by the spacing between red lines that the model trains for fewer epochs
than MedAL. In contrast to the MedAL model, we also see O-MedAL’s minimum accuracy at the start of each AL iteration
is generally increasing, which suggests that the online method is able to learn incrementally without forgetting previous
learnings.
The table and two subplots of Figure 5 show how O-MedAL exposes a three-way relationship between accuracy,
percent dataset labeled and computational efﬁciency. For MedAL and O-MedAL, respectively, the green markers
highlight the most accurate models, the purple markers show the most data efﬁcient models, and the black and dark
purple markers show the most computationally efﬁcient models. Figure 5b addresses computational efﬁciency while
Figure 5c addresses accuracy. Both plots share an x axis of percent dataset labeled. The dashed horizontal blue line
represents the baseline ResNet18 model trained on the fully labeled dataset for 80 epochs. The dotted blue lines are
MedAL. For clarity, we plot only the best performing O-MedAL models.
Figure 5b plots the cumulative number of examples processed (on log scale) as a function of the percent dataset
labeled. The curve for each ﬁxed epoch model can be computed before training using Equation 10. The curves for
models using patience are not computed in advance of training, since early stopping leads to varying epochs per AL

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
13
Experiment
Max Test Accuracy
Percent Labeled
Examples Processed
Wall Time
+
OMedAL p=0.875, patience=5
92.02% (+6.30%)
90.62%
177658 (+134.01%)
1:29
X
MedAL (patience=20)
91.18% (+5.46%)
73.76%
1178079 (+1451.74%)
10:06
+
OMedAL p=0.875, patience=20
85.71% (+0.00%)
25.29%
48335 (-36.33%)
0:56
X
MedAL (patience=20)
86.97% (+1.26%)
33.72%
265106 (+249.19%)
4:14
+
OMedAL, p=0.125
85.71% (+0.00%)
80.08%
24296 (-67.82%)
0:54
OMedAL, p=0.125, patience=5
85.71% (+0.00%)
48.47%
51759 (-31.82%)
0:39
ResNet18 Baseline
85.71% (+0.00%)
100.00%
75920 (+0.00%)
0:22
(a) Experimental Results
20
40
60
80
100
Percent Dataset Labeled
103
104
105
106
Number of Examples Processed (log scale)
Online Medal
p=0.125, 10 epoch
p=0.875, 10 epoch
p=0.125, patience=05
p=0.875, patience=05
p=0.875, patience=10
p=0.875, patience=20
MedAL
patience=20 (150 epoch)
patience=10 (150 epoch)
ResNet18 (at best accuracy)
(b) O-MedAL Computational Efﬁciency
20
40
60
80
100
Percent Dataset Labeled
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Max Test Accuracy
Online MedAL
p=0.125, 10 epoch
p=0.875, 10 epoch
p=0.125, patience=05
p=0.875, patience=05
p=0.875, patience=10
p=0.875, patience=20
MedAL
patience=10 (150 epoch)
patience=20 (150 epoch)
ResNet18 (best accuracy)
(c) O-MedAL Accuracy
FIGUR E 5
O-MedAL Evaluation. Showing how computational efﬁciency (b) and accuracy (c) relate to labeling
efﬁciency. Marked points and table (a) highlight which MedAL and O-MedAL models perform best in each category.
iteration. MedAL and O-MedAL curves show exponential growth. However, we show with the gray and purple markers
that O-MedAL models reach baseline accuracy using less data and backpropagating fewer images than the baseline,
suggesting O-MedAL can scale to larger datasets.
To further examine the computationally efﬁciency of our online method, we measure total training time (wall time)
of the shown models. The right-most column of the table (5c) shows that the online method trains on Messidor between
4.5 to 6.8 times faster than MedAL, though no model is faster than the ResNet18 baseline. This is primarily due to
the fact that at each AL iteration, the algorithm evaluates the feature embedding for every labeled and unlabeled
image, and secondarily due to the fact that we evaluated validation performance once per epoch. O-MedAL models
tested have approximately 500 to 2000 small epochs compared to ResNet18’s 80 large epochs. We evaluate validation
performance each epoch, which is useful for the analysis in this paper, but leads to unnecessarily large wall time. Indeed,
validation performance in practice can be computed once per AL iteration. The most interesting ﬁnding in the wall time
analysis is that the O-MedAL model (p=0.875, patience=20) with the purple marker should be relatively computationally
expensive model (as evidenced by Figure 5b), yet it shows small wall time, processes fewer examples and achieves
baseline accuracy with less labeled data than most of the models we tested. This ﬁnding is counter-intuitive, yet offers
useful practical advice when working with O-MedAL. While one might assume a smaller model should train faster and
process fewer examples, we found that the larger, more computationally expensive models can reach baseline accuracy

14
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
just as efﬁciently using less labeled data. This motivates generally choosing p close to 1.
Figure 5c plots test accuracy as a function of percent dataset labeled. The p = 0.875 O-MedAL models consistently
show the highest accuracy over the AL iterations, which also means these models have the best data labeling efﬁciency.
As p decreases, the model exchanges a decreased accuracy for fewer training examples backpropagated. The low
accuracy of the p = 0.125 model is evidence that we need to include some amount of previously labeled data while
training the model. We also found that three ﬁxed epoch O-MedAL models (p ∈{0.375, 0.75, 0.875}) and all p = 0.875
models with patience outperform the best MedAL model, which denotes a signiﬁcant improvement over the baseline.
The fact that these models exceed the baseline accuracy is very important and suggests that OMedAL is able to ﬁnd
subsets of the training data that are more useful to the task than the full dataset.
Our results show that O-MedAL signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy of its underlying ResNet18 model by as much
as 6.3%. We also show that O-MedAL can reach the same performance as its baseline model using only 25% of the
training dataset. Third, we show that O-MedAL is even able to backpropagate 67% fewer examples than the ResNet18
model, with modest increase in wall time.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
On each of the three datasets tested, MedAL achieves a higher overall accuracy and uses less labeled training data. The
results conﬁrm that informative examples are maximally dissimilar in feature space to previously trained examples and
close to the decision boundary of the current model.
Our proposed active learning framework uses the trained baseline model to sample unlabeled examples. As the
model improves its ability to classify the data, it also naturally improves its ability to identify unlabeled examples worthy
of labeling. Since the method samples examples with maximum uncertainty and distance to the labeled examples,
we can infer that its performance will continue to improve relative to other sampling techniques on larger unlabeled
datasets. We also show the method is robust to class imbalance in the unlabeled datasets by showing consistent
improvement over competing methods on multi-class unbalanced data, multi-class balanced data, and binary balanced
data via the Skin Cancer, Breast Cancer and Messidor datasets, respectively. Future work could attempt to quantify
how the performance changes as a function of unlabeled dataset size and also measure how the class distribution of the
unlabeled dataset changes.
Our online component to the active learning framework enhances the applicability of the framework to numerous
scenarios. The most pertinent is the medical setting where there is not enough labeled data to train a supervised deep
model, but there exist human annotators interested in using a predictive model to enhance their diagnostic workﬂow.
For instance, in Diabetic Retinopathy, a physician must manually review high resolution retinal fundus images of Diabetic
patients for microaneurysms that may be only a few pixels large. O-MedAL enables the training of a deep model in
such a setting, where it interactively asks the physician to annotate certain images most likely to improve the model’s
ability, and simultaneously returns a set of predictions on a set of images. The online component enables near real-time
interaction with a human annotator, where if we set the batch size to M = 1, the model is as up-to-date as possible each
time it queries an unlabeled example and generates a set of predictions. Setting M = 1 is desirable but intractable for
many active learning methods, including MedAL without the online portion, where the annotator would need to wait
hours between training events before labeling the next batch of images. To the best of our knowledge, O-MedAL is the
only existing framework enabling near real-time training of deep models on limited data in an active learning context.
As future work, we plan to incorporate O-MedAL into more real world medical applications with clinical annotators, like
we have done in our EyeQual project paper (Costa et al., 2019).
O-MedAL is presented as a solution for active learning, but the framework may have useful applications as a more

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
15
generalized mechanism for training supervised deep learning models. Further work should explore whether the 6%
improvement in accuracy of the baseline model generalizes to other architectures and datasets. The ability to reach
higher accuracy using less of the data suggests the framework can also be used to identify a subset of training examples
that are not useful to a particular learning task.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we extend MedAL by introducing an online learning method. The online method retains all the beneﬁts of
MedAL while improving both its accuracy and computational efﬁciency.
We evaluate MedAL on three distinct medical image datasets: Messidor, the Breast Cancer dataset, and the Skin
Cancer dataset. Our results show that MedAL is efﬁcient, requiring less labeled examples than existing methods. The
method achieves comparable results to a model trained on the fully labeled dataset using only 650 of 768 images.
Additionally, MedAL attains 80% accuracy using 425 images, corresponding to 32% and 40% reduction compared to
uncertainty and random sampling methods, respectively. Finally, we show that MedAL is robust, performing well on
both binary and multi-class classiﬁcation problems, and also on balanced and unbalanced datasets. MedAL shows
consistently better performance than the competing methods on all three medical image datasets.
We compare O-MedAL to both MedAL and the underlying baseline deep network. We show that O-MedAL is more
accurate, improving test accuracy of its underlying ResNet18 deep network by 6.30%. We also show that O-MedAL
achieves the baseline model’s accuracy when only 25.29% of the dataset is labeled. Finally, O-MedAL is computationally
efﬁcient, reducing training wall time by 4.5 to 6 times over MedAL and processing up to 68% fewer examples than the
baseline ResNet18 with only 80% of the dataset. We have shown that O-MedAL is a mechanism for efﬁciently training
deep supervised models in an active learning setting, and that it signiﬁcantly improves performance of the underlying
baseline model while using less data.
CO N FL I C T OF IN T E R E S T
The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest for this work.
RE F E R E N C E S
Angluin, D. (2004) Queries revisited. Theoretical Computer Science, 313, 175–194.
Aresta, G., Araújo, T., Kwok, S., Chennamsetty, S. S., Safwan, M., Alex, V., Marami, B., Prastawa, M., Chan, M., Donovan, M.,
Fernandez, G., Zeineh, J., Kohl, M., Walz, C., Ludwig, F., Braunewell, S., Baust, M., Vu, Q. D., To, M. N. N., Kim, E., Kwak,
J. T., Galal, S., Sanchez-Freire, V., Brancati, N., Frucci, M., Riccio, D., Wang, Y., Sun, L., Ma, K., Fang, J., Kone, I., Boulmane, L.,
Campilho, A., Eloy, C., Polónia, A. and Aguiar, P. (2019) Bach: Grand challenge on breast cancer histology images. Medical
Image Analysis, 56, 122 – 139. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361841518307941.
Baram, Y., El-Yaniv, R. and Luz, K. (2003) Online choice of active learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5,
255–291.
Cai, W., Zhang, Y. and Zhou, J. (2013) Maximizing expected model change for active learning in regression. In 2013 IEEE 13th
International Conference on Data Mining, 51–60. IEEE.
Cohn, D. A., Ghahramani, Z. and Jordan, M. I. (1995) Active learning with statistical models. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 4, 705–712.

16
SMAILAGIC ET AL.
Costa, P., Araújo, T., Aresta, G., Galdran, A., Mendonça, A. M., Smailagic, A. and Campilho, A. (2019) Eyewes: Weakly supervised
pre-trained convolutional neural networks for diabetic retinopathy detection. In 2019 16th International Conference on
Machine Vision Applications (MVA), 1–6.
Costa, P., Galdran, A., Meyer, M. I., Niemeijer, M., Abràmoff, M., Mendonça, A. M. and Campilho, A. (2018) End-to-end adversar-
ial retinal image synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 37, 781–791.
Dasgupta, S., Hsu, D. J. and Monteleoni, C. (2008) A general agnostic active learning algorithm. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, 353–360.
Ertekin, S., Huang, J., Bottou, L. and Giles, L. (2007) Learning on the border: Active learning in imbalanced data classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’07, 127–136.
New York, NY, USA: ACM. URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1321440.1321461.
Freund, Y., Seung, H. S., Shamir, E. and Tishby, N. (1993) Information, prediction, and query by committee. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, 483–490.
— (1997) Selective sampling using the query by committee algorithm. Machine learning, 28, 133–168.
Freytag, A., Rodner, E. and Denzler, J. (2014) Selecting inﬂuential examples: Active learning with expected model output
changes. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 562–577. Springer.
Gal, Y., Islam, R. and Ghahramani, Z. (2017) Deep Bayesian active learning with image data. In Proceedings of the 34th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning (eds. D. Precup and Y. W. Teh), vol. 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, 1183–1192. International Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia: PMLR. URL: http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v70/gal17a.html.
Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y. (2010) Understanding the difﬁculty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 249–256.
Górriz, M., Giró-i Nieto, X., Carlier, A. and Faure, E. (2017) Cost-effective active learning for melanoma segmentation. In ML4H:
Machine Learning for Health Workshop at NIPS 2017. Long Beach, CA, USA.
Gutman, D., Codella, N. C., Celebi, E., Helba, B., Marchetti, M., Mishra, N. and Halpern, A. (2016) Skin lesion analysis toward
melanoma detection: A challenge at the international symposium on biomedical imaging (isbi) 2016, hosted by the interna-
tional skin imaging collaboration (isic). arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.01397.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. and Sun, J. (2015) Deep residual learning for image recognition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
Homeyer, A., Schenk, A., Dahmen, U., Dirsch, O., Huang, H. and Hahn, H. K. (2012) A comparison of sampling strategies for
histological image analysis. Journal of Pathology Informatics, 2, 11.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014) Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1412.6980.
Lewis, D. D. and Catlett, J. (1994) Heterogeneous uncertainty sampling for supervised learning. In Machine learning proceedings
1994, 148–156. Elsevier.
Lewis, D. D. and Gale, W. A. (1994) A sequential algorithm for training text classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Interna-
tional ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 3–12. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
Litjens, G., Kooi, T., Bejnordi, B. E., Setio, A. A. A., Ciompi, F., Ghafoorian, M., Van Der Laak, J. A., Van Ginneken, B. and Sánchez,
C. I. (2017) A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image analysis, 42, 60–88.
Melendez, J., Ginneken, B. v., Maduskar, P., Philipsen, R. H. H. M., Ayles, H. and Sánchez, C. I. (2016) On Combining Multiple-
Instance Learning and Active Learning for Computer-Aided Detection of Tuberculosis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging,
35, 1013–1024.

SMAILAGIC ET AL.
17
Melville, P. and Mooney, R. J. (2004) Diverse ensembles for active learning. In Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁrst international confer-
ence on Machine learning, 74. ACM.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S. and Dean, J. (2013) Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.01397. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
Murugesan, K. and Carbonell, J. (2017) Active learning from peers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 7008–
7017.
Pace, D. F., Dalca, A. V., Geva, T., Powell, A. J., Moghari, M. H. and Golland, P. (2015) Interactive Whole-Heart Segmentation in
Congenital Heart Disease. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 80–88.
Richards, J. W., Starr, D. L., Brink, H., Miller, A. A., Bloom, J. S., Butler, N. R., James, J. B., Long, J. P. and Rice, J. (2011) ACTIVE
LEARNING TO OVERCOME SAMPLE SELECTION BIAS: APPLICATION TO PHOTOMETRIC VARIABLE STAR CLASSIFI-
CATION. The Astrophysical Journal, 744, 192. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088%2F0004-637x%2F744%2F2%2F192.
Sculley, D. (2007) Online active learning methods for fast label-efﬁcient spam ﬁltering. In CEAS.
Settles, B. (2008) Curious machines: Active learning with structured instances. Ph.D. thesis, University of Wisconsin–Madison.
Smailagic, A., Costa, P., Noh, H. Y., Walawalkar, D., Khandelwal, K., Galdran, A., Mirshekari, M., Fagert, J., Xu, S., Zhang, P. et al.
(2018) Medal: Accurate and robust deep active learning for medical image analysis. In 2018 17th IEEE International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), 481–488. IEEE.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J. and Wojna, Z. (2016) Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2818–2826.
Wen, S., Kurc, T. M., Hou, L., Saltz, J. H., Gupta, R. R., Batiste, R., Zhao, T., Nguyen, V., Samaras, D. and Zhu, W. (2018) Comparison
of Different Classiﬁers with Active Learning to Support Quality Control in Nucleus Segmentation in Pathology Images.
AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings, 2017, 227–236.
Yang, Y., Ma, Z., Nie, F., Chang, X. and Hauptmann, A. G. (2015) Multi-class active learning by uncertainty sampling with diver-
sity maximization. International Journal of Computer Vision, 113, 113–127.
Zhang, C., Bengio, S., Hardt, M., Recht, B. and Vinyals, O. (2016) Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generaliza-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03530.
Zhang, C., Tavanapong, W., Kijkul, G., Wong, J., de Groen, P. C. and Oh, J. (2018) Similarity-based active learning for image
classiﬁcation under class imbalance. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 1422–1427.
Zhao, Y., Zhang, J., Xie, H., Zhang, S. and Gu, L. (2018) Minimization of annotation work: diagnosis of mammographic masses
via active learning. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 63, 115003.
Zhou, Z., Shin, J., Zhang, L., Gurudu, S., Gotway, M. and Liang, J. (2017) Fine-tuning convolutional neural networks for biomedi-
cal image analysis: actively and incrementally. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
7340–7351.
