Vol:.(1234567890)
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-023-01433-3
1 3
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Automation in Administrative 
Procedures: Potentials, Limitations, and Framework Conditions
Peter Parycek1 · Verena Schmid2 · Anna‑Sophie Novak2
Received: 13 July 2022 / Accepted: 31 May 2023 / Published online: 20 June 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Integrating artificial intelligence (AI) systems into administrative procedures can 
revolutionize the way processes are conducted and fundamentally change established 
forms of action and organization in administrative law. However, implementing AI 
in administrative procedures requires a comprehensive evaluation of the capabilities 
and limitations of different systems, including considerations of transparency and 
data availability. Data are a crucial factor in the operation of AI systems and the 
validity of their predictions. It is essential to ensure that the data used to train AI 
algorithms are extensive, representative, and free of bias. Transparency is also an 
important aspect establishing trust and reliability in AI systems, particularly regard-
ing the potential for transparent representation in rule-based and machine-learning 
AI systems. This paper examines the potential and challenges that arise from inte-
grating AI into administrative procedures. In addition, the paper offers a nuanced 
perspective on current developments in artificial intelligence and provides a concep-
tual framework for its potential applications in administrative procedures. Beyond 
this, the paper highlights essential framework conditions that require continuous 
monitoring to ensure optimal results in practice.
Keywords  Artificial intelligence · AI · Law · Automation · Digital law · 
Transparency · Bias · Digital Government · E-Government · Legal Tech
 *	 Anna‑Sophie Novak 
	
anna-sophie.novak@donau-uni.ac.at
	
Peter Parycek 
	
peter.parycek@donau-uni.ac.at
	
Verena Schmid 
	
verena.schmid@donau-uni.ac.at
1	
Vice Rector ‑ Vice Rectorate for Teaching/Scientific Education and Digital Transformation 
(CDO), University for Continuing Education Krems, Krems an Der Donau, Austria
2	
Research Associate, University for Continuing Education Krems, Krems an Der Donau, Austria

8391
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
Introduction
The digital age has brought numerous advances and technological improvements, 
transforming how we live, work, and interact with each other, so the importance 
of E-Government has also become increasingly apparent in recent years (De Vries 
et al., 2015). E-Government provides numerous benefits for government, businesses, 
and citizens (Edelmann & Mergel, 2022) and aims to increase the efficiency, trans-
parency, and accessibility of government services (Gupta, 2019). E-Government 
can improve citizens’ quality of life and create a more responsive and accountable 
administration by automating administrative procedures, reducing bureaucracy, and 
improving online access to information and services (Toll et al., 2019). Therefore, 
developing and implementing E-government initiatives is a crucial aspect of mod-
ernizing and improving administrative processes and services (Zuiderwijk et  al., 
2021). Recent efforts in E-government include the development of the e-ID or the 
creation of electronic delivery options. The focus has been on making services user-
centric, including creating faster processes through the automation of administrative 
procedures. In recent years, the topic of automation has become increasingly impor-
tant (Desouza et al., 2020) (Aoki, 2020) and includes both full and partial automa-
tion. Currently, automation is mainly considered in Unified Modeling Language 
(UML), which is suitable for representing rules and relationships that non-experts 
can understand. The execution of the rules is still up to an imperative programming 
language and the underlying predefined routines. Advances in AI research have led 
to increased consideration of its potential to automate administrative processes. 
This approach is not new and has been explored in E-government for more than 3 
decades, with projects aimed at using AI to automate laws or support the legisla-
tive process. Two different research streams have evolved in the field, rule-based 
AI and machine-learning AI systems, which are the two main systems of artificial 
intelligence. Rule-based AI systems use a set of pre-determined rules to solve prob-
lems and make decisions and are therefore considered particularly suitable for law. 
These systems can be precise and accurate in their decisions, but they are limited by 
the rules they have been programmed with and cannot adapt to new situations. On 
the other hand, machine-learning AI systems are designed to learn from data and 
make decisions based on patterns and relationships found in that data. They have the 
potential to make more accurate predictions and decisions but require large amounts 
of data to learn from and can sometimes make unexpected or incorrect decisions. 
The various systems, their potential to automate administrative processes, and the 
associated challenges are the focus of our studies.
Automation through rule-based systems holds significant potential in the con-
tinental European legal system, for example, in Germany or Austria, which is a 
result of the nature of the legal system itself (Legrand, 1996) (Horton, 2011). In 
the civil law system that prevails there, laws are codified and clearly defined, pro-
viding a comprehensive framework for the administration of legal decisions (Fon 
& Parisi, 2006). This structure makes it easier for rule-based AI systems to auto-
mate processes and aid in decision-making because the rules are clearly defined 
and predictable.

8392
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
In contrast, the Anglo-American legal system, also known as the common law 
system, relies on judicial decisions and the principle of “stare decisis,” i.e., the 
notion that legal decisions should be based on past precedents. This system relies 
on reasoning processes in which legal decisions by higher authorities are considered 
binding on lower bodies (Scalia, 1995). For this paper, we chose to focus on the 
civil law system with examples from Germany and Austria, where the principle of 
legality prevails, as a blueprint for other civil law countries. The principle of legal-
ity states that all public administration may only be executed based on the law. This 
principle holds that all citizens are subject to the law and that all public power must 
be exercised within the limits of the law. This means that individuals and institu-
tions, including the government and the judiciary, are bound by the law and must 
act in accordance with it. In countries where the principle of legality is predominant, 
the “Law is Code” concept needs to be examined in more detail. The idea that law 
can be encoded as computer code and integrated into automated systems aligns well 
with the principles of legality and transparency: by codifying laws clearly and con-
cisely, automated systems can ensure that they are applied consistently and fairly, 
reducing the risk of human error, and improving the efficiency of the legal process. 
This has the potential to improve access to justice and increase trust in the legal sys-
tem, particularly when the legal process can be complex and time-consuming.
Our paper deals with the research question: what are the benefits, major chal-
lenges and limitations, and framework conditions for the use of automation and AI 
in administrative procedures?
To provide a thorough analysis in the legal context, we focused our studies on 
Austria and Germany, two countries with well-established legal systems. As legal 
scholars with extensive expertise in these legal frameworks, we can conduct an in-
depth and nuanced analysis of the legal context surrounding our research questions. 
By focusing on these specific countries, we provided a comprehensive and detailed 
understanding of the legal and regulatory framework that informs the issues under 
consideration. Due to the high degree of formalization and the close legal ties of 
administrative action, administrative law is well-suited for legal automation. How-
ever, ensuring that certain framework conditions are met is important to facilitate 
successful implementation.
In the following section, we examine the background and development of auto-
mation in public administration. This analysis serves as a crucial foundation for 
understanding the current state of the field and the opportunities for improvement. 
Additionally, this section presents a comprehensive overview of the various stages at 
which automation can be implemented. Subsequently, the paper proceeds to present 
the research design. This section is followed by a discussion section that addresses 
the research questions, which are divided into subsections: First, the potentials of 
using rule-based and machine learning systems are presented to show the benefits 
AI can bring to public administration. However, it is also important to consider the 
challenges and considerations that arise when implementing AI systems. There-
fore, the following section discusses these hurdles, limitations, and implications. 
Finally, we have developed frameworks based on our research and a thorough review 
of the relevant literature to provide a guide for implementing AI in administrative 
processes.

8393
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
Background
Digitization of Law
Digitization of law describes the use of digital technologies in a legal context and 
does not take place in a vacuum but is rather integrated into the topic of technol-
ogy and culture, and they mutually influence each other (Boehme-Neßler, 2008). 
The associated technical terms can be clearly defined, while “culture” and the 
associated social and economic impact cannot.
In the context of culture and to what extent the culture of law or society is 
changing, there are discussions such as Lessig’s: Thus Lawrence Lessig’s book 
“Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace” is shaping the discourse with “Code is 
Law,” which describes the law-like effect of hardware and software in digital 
cyberspace (Lessig, 1999). Alongside the system of order that a constitution pro-
vides for citizens, a technical system of order has developed among the platform 
operators such as Google, Facebook, and others. These platforms have become 
an integral part of the public space, significantly shaping public opinion and 
discourse. However, their actions, like content moderation, are often character-
ized by a lack of transparency and democratic legitimation. Digital marketplace 
providers or cloud service providers, like Amazon Web Services (AWS), Micro-
soft, or Google, may even withdraw access to marketplaces or cloud infrastruc-
ture services. A prominent example became the case of the social network Parler, 
which evolved into an online space for right-wingers and was used to promote 
and organize the attack on the Capitol. As a reaction to the attack, Parler was 
removed from the app stores by Google and Apple, as well as banned from the 
AWS cloud services (Munn, 2021). Platform operators have assumed suprana-
tional supremacy, operating basic infrastructures, communication networks, and 
public discourse spaces moderated or made visible by programmed algorithms. 
This phenomenon can be described as a digital curtain draped over our real lives 
(Scholz et al., 2020). On the other hand, the concept of “Law is Code” describes 
that programming is already done in the law (Mohun & Roberts, 2020) (Danish 
Agency for Digitization, 2018) (Novak et al., 2021). There is a growing need to 
develop legal frameworks that enable the implementation of automation in a man-
ner that is ethical, sustainable, and socially responsible. To achieve a success-
ful implementation, it is essential to study and understand the criteria required 
for the formulation of such laws at an early stage, which involves identifying the 
potential risks and challenges associated with automation, as well as the societal 
and ethical implications of its use. This issue also presents an opportunity for 
further research.
From a technical perspective, two categories can be distinguished: legal docu-
mentation and legal automation (Pohle, 2022). Legal documentation is the use 
of IT for documentation and information. Typical examples are the transfer of 
data storage to electronic registers and databases or the provision of information. 
Legal automation is the possibility of full or partial automation of legally rel-
evant actions such as judgments, administrative acts, or contract conclusions. The 

8394
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
interaction of legal automation and legal documentation can be well demonstrated 
through the example of family allowance without application in Austria: the pay-
ment of family allowance without application, as it has been possible in Austria 
since 2015, would not be possible if there were no corresponding registers and 
databases from which the data could be mapped in a logical process. This exam-
ple clearly illustrates the interaction between automation and documentation and 
that automation is impossible without documentation.
An example from the area of civil law is smart contracts. These are self-executing, 
autonomous computer protocols that can facilitate, execute, and enforce agreements 
between parties (Corrales et al., 2019). Here, the requirements and consequences of 
entering a contract are programmed in advance in an algorithm (Forgó & Zöchling-
Jud, 2018). Compliance with the agreements can be checked in real-time, and if there 
is a discrepancy, a penalty can be imposed, for example. The automation of contract 
law can be programmed in a tamper-proof manner with the help of blockchain tech-
nology (Corrales et al., 2019)—and is, again, both documentation and automation of 
the law. Fully automated legal processes or legal assistance systems are also known 
as LegalRobots (Wagner, 2020). These technical developments, such as smart con-
tracts, blockchain technologies, or LegalRobots, are in the broadest sense referred to 
as legal tech (Corrales et al., 2019).
Digitization of law has had a significant impact by streamlining processes, reduc-
ing bureaucracy, and increasing transparency. Digital platforms and E-government 
services have made it easier for citizens to access information about their rights and 
obligations and to complete administrative procedures online, which has led to a 
more efficient and user-friendly public administration system that reduces process-
ing times and improves citizen experience (Gasova & Stofkova, 2017). The digiti-
zation of law has also made it easier for public authorities to monitor compliance 
with and enforcement of laws, contributing to more efficient and effective use of 
public resources (Umbach & Tkalec, 2022). Overall, the digitization of law has sig-
nificantly impacted administrative procedures, making them more accessible, trans-
parent, and efficient for citizens.
In the field of administration, which encompasses a broad range of tasks, automa-
tion has the potential to streamline administrative processes, reduce manual errors, 
and free up valuable resources for more critical tasks. As such, automation is emerg-
ing as a game-changer in administration (Berglind et al., 2022). Assistance systems 
to support legal users are already in use. They are expected to increase in the next 
few years due to the available data, technical development, and innovative spirit—
from supporting research to supporting the creation of legal texts to checking con-
clusive argumentation (Crawford & Schultz, 2019) (Collenette et al., 2023). These 
systems can also be used in the field of legistics to test and simulate the enforcement 
of laws (Atkinson et al., 2020).
The emergence of blockchain technology has opened a wide range of opportuni-
ties and rethinking of public administration. By integrating authentic state registry 
data into their processes, blockchain providers could incorporate the state registry 
date of individuals and their objects into smart contracts in case of a transfer or 
ownership. For example, the new ownership of a property or a car is intended to be 
transferred to state registers through automated contracts without any interaction of 

8395
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
public servants. These changes will lead to an entirely new form of administration 
and thus need an in-depth discussion about the constitutional and societal conse-
quences and the role and meaning of administration. If contracts are programmed in 
civil law, the question arises as to what extent laws could be programmed as code. 
Administrative law can lend itself to this because of the high level of formalization 
and the large amount of data available in registers and applications of the adminis-
tration or even the economy.
Our research paper explores the potential and hurdles for the automation of 
administrative procedures. The issue of aligning administrative law with civil 
law is beyond the scope of this study but represents promising future research 
opportunities.
The Beginnings of Mechanized/Automated Systems in Public Administration
“Automation” describes the execution of a process by means of technical perfor-
mance without human action or intervention (Houy et al., 2019). The term that pre-
cedes the idea of automation of the computing age is that of mechanization, presum-
ably inspired by the various automata of the time, such as Vaucanson’s mechanical 
duck from 1738. This duck was able to take grains from a hand, swallow them, 
digest them, and excrete them again at the end. In his criticism of the “naïve” auto-
mation euphoria of the legal tech hype, Jhering used the duck as a comparison to the 
judicial application of the law, “The case is pushed in at the front and comes out at 
the back as a verdict” (Meder, 2020, p. 24).
The vision of mechanized law has a centuries-old tradition dating back to Roman 
law (Kantorowicz, 1925). The “mechanized” law was supposed to allow the direct 
application of legal regulation without interpretation. The motive for this was often 
the conflict of power and the distrust between the legislator and the person exer-
cising the law. This situation was especially the case in absolutist state systems 
with a lack of separation of powers, in which the legislative, executive, and judicial 
branches were united in “one ruler.” Thus, the ruler had to ensure that, although 
he had to rely on human decision-makers for the actual execution of his laws, he 
controlled the interpretation of the law. He had to ensure the judiciary was closely 
bound to him in interpreting the law. Such considerations were already made when 
the “Corpus iuris” was compiled under Emperor Justinian—any editing of the 
sources beyond the mechanical was forbidden (Meder, 2020) (c) (Savigny, 1814). 
Another example can be observed in the political discourse leading up to the draft-
ing of the Prussian General Land Law. According to Hattenhauer, a cabinet order 
dated July 27, 1780, aimed to achieve two central reform objectives. Firstly, all leg-
islation for the states and subjects was to be composed in their native language, with 
precise definitions and comprehensive collection. Secondly, in line with the argu-
ments of the legal philosopher Beccaria, the authority of judges was to be restricted 
or even eliminated, through the creation of a law commission charged with interpret-
ing and advancing the law (Hattenhauer, 1995).
Absolutist systems failed with their vision of a final mechanical administra-
tion and jurisprudence acting according to their will. The attempt to represent the 

8396
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
diversity of life in a definitive set of laws has also failed (Fiedler, 1985). In many 
cases, the legal system has evolved horizontally openly, allowing for different inter-
pretations and ensuring dynamic legal development. The discussion of the mecha-
nization or automation of law has continued over the centuries but has remained 
primarily a theoretical discussion.
In the German administration, mechanical data processing began in the 1920s 
with the first punched card machines in the postal and railroad administrations to 
support human activities (Gräwe, 2011). According to a report to the Bundestag, 21 
computer and EDP systems were in use in 1957 (Gräwe, 2011). By 1968, this num-
ber had risen to 3863 systems (BT-Drucksache V/3355, 1968). These were mainly 
used for their namesake activity of computation (to compute = to calculate some-
thing) and took over numerical mass and routine activities (Gräwe, 2011), including 
the calculation of payments and emoluments, the calculation of pensions, the postal 
check service, the preparation of statistics and the performance of scientific calcula-
tions, and, as a special feature, the maintenance of the Central Register of Foreign-
ers (BT-Drucksache VI/648, 1970). Whereby the report to the Bundestag explicitly 
states as a rationalization effect that “[…] it must be stated that without the introduc-
tion of EDP, various tasks would not have been tackled at all and other tasks could 
no longer have been carried out properly due to the increased demands in terms of 
type and scope” (BT-Drucksache VI/648, 1970). The report also already contains 
plans for the subsequent development steps. In particular, the establishment of a reg-
ister in which “[…] numerous personal and subject files are kept, with the result 
that the information required jointly by several administrative agencies can be stored 
by one agency for all and retrieved by everyone” (BT-Drucksache V/3355, 1968, 
p. 4). Ideas are already discernible here that were to reemerge decades later under 
the designations “once-only” and “digital-ready legislation” (Schmidt et al., 2021) 
(Lachana et al., 2018) (Justesen & Plesner, 2022).
Levels of Automation in Administrative Procedures
Based on the findings in the literature, different levels of automation of adminis-
trative action can be categorized as follows: full automation, partial automation of 
administrative action, and assistance systems that offer specific automated support 
functions for administrative staff.
In the case of full automation, all sub-steps and the coordination of the entire 
process are transferred to a system (Etscheid, 2018) so that all procedural steps can 
be carried out without human intervention (Guckelberger, 2019). For example, in 
Austria, no-application procedures (“no-stop-shops”) can be used to pay out family 
allowances without any application from citizens.1 For simply structured and stand-
ardized procedures with an external trigger that gives rise to a claim, full automation 
1  The payment of family allowance in Austria is an application-free procedure, as the conditions for the 
granting of family allowance are checked automatically based on the child’s data recorded by the registry 
office after a birth. If all the necessary data is available, all further steps up to the payment of the family 
allowance are carried out automatically.

8397
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
without a dedicated application is conceivable and, as the first procedures have 
shown, possible (Kompetenzzentrum Öffentliche IT). In Austria, the only techni-
cal implementations of these procedures are rule-based standardized administrative 
procedures carried out by querying data points from registers or specialized applica-
tions, including family allowances and income tax returns.
In partially automated administrative processes, some procedural steps are taken 
over independently by technical systems (Guckelberger, 2019). Individual steps that 
cannot be automated are processed by humans. The human-generated results are 
transferred to a technical system for further processing, and potentially automated 
decisions can be made. AI systems are not obligated to check the results of the par-
tial steps performed by humans; the overall responsibility remains with the human 
(Etscheid, 2018). A similar variant of partial automation is the preparation of a deci-
sion with automated checking of the legally relevant facts, whereby humans take the 
final decision. Partial automation can be further classified depending on when it is 
used. Ex ante, for example, information can be provided as a basis for decision-mak-
ing, or decision proposals can be made; ex post, human decisions can be reviewed 
(Braun Binder & Spielkamp, 2021). The two major related problems here are the 
high level of trust in machine-based decisions (“automation bias”) and the associ-
ated reduction in the decision corridor of the human. The more extensive the review 
and preparation of the decision, the greater the associated risks. The extent to which 
the need for human review in the event of a positive decision in a single-party pro-
cedure could be omitted should be discussed. From the perspective of partial auto-
mation of administrative action, the concept of “augmented intelligence” is helpful, 
which relies on the synergy of humans and machines. Here, AI does not replace 
humans but explores the synergistic interaction of humans and machines (Kirste, 
2019). Research on augmented intelligence aims at concepts of joint solution find-
ing between humans and machines (Carter & Nielsen, 2017). By combining data 
science, machine learning, and human intelligence, the legitimacy of administrative 
action can benefit the decision-making phase ().
The third variant of automation is assistance systems. In this category, automa-
tion does not refer to the entire procedure but rather to specific elements in the pro-
cedure that are executed through automated data processing and provide results to 
administrative staff for further processing. AI-based systems that have been devel-
oped and trained for predefined tasks are particularly suitable for evaluating data 
sets. Assistance systems differ in that they merely facilitate processes of information 
procurement and evaluation through automation but do not automate administrative 
action to a predominant degree—the boundaries between assistance systems and 
partially automated administrative action are fluid.
Research Design
Our studies are based on a scoping review (Munn et al., 2022) and the use of juris-
prudential methods. We decided to use a scoping review approach to identify knowl-
edge gaps, clarify key concepts, and determine the body of literature on the topic of 
automation in public administration (Munn et al., 2018). The first step was to define 

8398
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
the research questions, which served as a guideline for our studies  (Peters et al., 
2015): What are the potentials, limitations, and framework conditions for the use of 
AI and automation in administrative procedures? Subsequently, we searched for rel-
evant literature and studies published in international journals and the Austrian and 
German legal literature. The literature was reviewed and evaluated based on prede-
termined inclusion and exclusion criteria (Sucharew & Macaluso, 2019). Inclusion 
criteria for the literature review included studies relevant to the research question, 
providing clear and transparent methods and results or investigating the relationship 
between law and society, or the impact of automated decisions on social outcomes. 
Keywords and topics by which we defined relevant results included “automation in 
public administration,” “artificial intelligence,” “administrative procedures,” “trans-
parency in public administration,” “transparency and artificial intelligence,” “history 
of automation,” and “use cases AI in public administration.” Exclusion criteria were 
a lack of relevance for our research question or inaccessibility due to restrictions. 
The total number of sources considered in more detail was about 130, which we 
then reduced to the most essential for our studies. Finally, the main findings were 
synthesized, and conclusions were drawn to respond to the research questions. Our 
approach allowed us to identify knowledge gaps and provide a solid theoretical and 
empirical basis for new research on this topic. In addition to the scoping review, 
we have also applied jurisprudential methods as legal scholars. These methods are 
the techniques and approaches used to study the law and legal systems and include, 
among others, comparative law, legal history, legal philosophy, and legal reasoning. 
Using jurisprudential methods ensures that the findings are grounded in a strong 
theoretical and conceptual framework. Combining a comprehensive literature review 
and using jurisprudential methods provides a solid foundation for our studies.
Discussion
This section addresses the research questions: What are the advantages of automa-
tion in administrative procedures? What are the main challenges and limitations that 
need to be overcome? And what are the factors that need to be considered when 
introducing AI into administrative procedures? By examining these questions, this 
paper aims to provide insights into the potential of automation in administrative pro-
cedures, as well as the challenges and opportunities that must be navigated to ensure 
its successful implementation. This section is structured into three corresponding 
subsections to provide a comprehensive overview of the addressed questions.
Potentials of Automation in Administrative Procedures
IT systems in widespread use in business and public administration follow impera-
tive programming, in which humans give the instructions, rules, and the opera-
tional sequence to the computer system. As aids for programming, independently 
of the selected programming language, UML (Unified Modeling Language) became 
established for the graphic representation and modeling of expirations, terms, and 

8399
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
relations, which is suitable for the representation of rules and relations, which can 
also be understood by laypersons. The execution of the rules is further incumbent on 
an imperative programming language and the underlying predefined routines. Dif-
ferent from this are the rule-based and machine-learning systems described below.
Potentials of Rule‑based Systems in Administrative Procedures
Rule-based systems have been developed for more than 4 decades, including expert 
systems for decision support. Rule-based systems typically consist of a database 
that, depending on the domain, is equipped with formalized structured expert 
knowledge and can also be further developed. Based on the knowledge base, the 
rules are mapped to establish relationships between the data objects and are usu-
ally formed as conditional sentences: “If A, then B” (Timmermann, 2020). In the 
context of administrative procedures, the Austrian family allowance shocontrast to 
rule-based systems, whose programming reflects the lawuld be mentioned here: If 
persons are residents or usually reside in Austria and have a minor child, then they 
are entitled to family allowance. If–then decision rules contain factual prerequisites 
that must be examined in the administrative procedure. These include, for exam-
ple, conditions, sub-conditions, or exceptions. Decision rules are usually codified 
in natural language (legal) texts, which lawyers use and often perceive as confusing 
by laypersons. Clear and precise specifications are necessary for programming to 
be able to represent legal rules (Etscheid, 2018). Therefore, from the perspective of 
technology, a clear decision-making structure of the laws and the associated proce-
dural sequences are the basis for automating administrative procedures.
Rule-based systems have the programmed logic specified in advance and are built 
on clear, fixed, and finite criteria that justify the rule selection made—this makes 
the systems transparent. (Zalnieriute et al., 2019). These clearly defined calculation, 
action, and/or processing rules for solving a problem are called algorithms. To model 
the knowledge base, the rules must be represented in as simple a syntactic form as 
possible. This increases comprehensibility (Beierle & Kern-Isberner, 2019) and makes 
visualizations in tree structures possible. Legal statutes are structured into individual 
pieces of information stored in nodes of a navigable knowledge tree and linked to each 
other according to a rule-based logic. This makes requirements with possible alterna-
tives, exceptions, and their relationship to each other visible. Similarly, obstacles and 
ambiguities can be more easily identified in advance. In addition, flowcharts and tree 
diagrams serve as visual communication between lawyers and software developers and 
support the communication of legal rules and processes. The representation and qual-
ity of generally valid rules are suitable for simple closed systems but find their limits 
in complex and open systems. The logical structure and the connections between rules 
enable rule-based systems to describe the path to the result, so there is a high degree of 
transparency in the system, and the verifiability by the user is ensured.
In addition to the formalization of legal principles and terms, the compilation and 
formalization of the facts are a necessary basis for subsumption and determining 
legal consequences. The use of templates for formalizing facts has a long tradition 
in administrative procedures and is the basis for the automated subsumption of facts 

8400
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
under elements of the law. Provided that no further fact-finding is required, the nec-
essary formalizations can be solved without (great) technical effort.
The basics for automated administrative procedures are the formalization of 
the law by explicitly representing the administrative procedure’s structure and the 
respective material law in combination with formalized legal terms with the help of 
ontologies and a formalized set of facts via the structured capture of forms. Under 
these conditions, automating administrative procedures with algorithms is possible 
in principle. If one condition is not met, the feasibility is limited to partial automa-
tion or assistance systems for the legal user. Therefore, the scope of application is 
limited to non-complex issues that can be recorded with structured forms.
Potentials of Machine‑learning Systems in Administrative Procedures
In contrast to rule-based systems, whose programming reflects the law text as accu-
rately as possible, machine-learning systems do not apply legal norms to arrive at 
their decisions. These systems learn inductively and require a large amount of data, 
e.g., of relevant cases or decisions. This data provides the basis for using machine 
learning algorithms to identify patterns and relationships statistically significant to 
the decision (Rühl, 2020). The first machine-learning systems can already be found 
in legal practice.
Two developments are particularly noteworthy from a legal application perspec-
tive. One is the progress in the developments of AI-assisted text generation, such 
as GPT3, published by OpenAI. Based on the analysis of selected texts, the GPT3 
algorithm can be trained in such a way that, once the training phase is complete, 
it can mimic the common writing style of a domain. First projects have also led to 
results for the legal field, which are suitable as a support service, for example, for 
drafting legal texts. The algorithm creates legal texts without knowing the actual 
legal context—these AI systems could be described as non-knowing artificial law-
yers. These capabilities are suitable for creating first drafts of decisions or finding 
content in legal databases.
The second development is machine-learning systems that use semantic algo-
rithms to search independently for rules in legal texts and can also present and apply 
them in a way that is comprehensible to humans. Another area of machine-learning 
use in an administrative procedure context is the data-supported prediction of a deci-
sion in a concrete lawsuit. Two different types of systems are used here: metadata 
and fact-of-the-case analyses (Rühl, 2020). The LexMachina system, for example, is 
based on (training) data from over 100,000 cases, with information about the parties 
involved, their representatives, and the judges. Based on the metadata or descriptive 
data of the persons involved, the system calculates the probability of a successful 
outcome of the case without analyzing the data regarding similar cases. In contrast, 
the facts-of-the-case analyses work by comparing the case’s facts with other relevant 
cases and the decisions made in these instances. These systems, which are already in 
use, do not make an independent decision and do not provide a reason for their deci-
sion but rather predict a possible outcome of proceedings.
If the corresponding prerequisites are met (sufficiently high quality and quantity 
of the training data and protection against bias in data and systems or the systems or 

8401
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
the guarantee of explainability of the results and transparency of the AI systems), 
it is conceivable for administrative procedures that the parties are presented with 
a decision drafted by machine-learning. They can decide whether they still want to 
conduct the proceedings in front of a human being or accept the “AI decision.”
Challenges and Limitations for Automation in Administrative Procedures
Integrating automation and technology in administrative procedures has the poten-
tial to revolutionize how public services are delivered. However, this approach is not 
without its challenges and limitations. In this chapter, we examine some of the key 
issues that arise when integrating automation into administration. Specifically, we 
consider the challenges that arise from the formalization of the law, the discretion 
afforded to administrative authorities, the availability and quality of data, and poten-
tial bias in automated decision-making.
Formalization of Law
Fully automated processes take over administrative action, while in partial automa-
tion, only parts run automatically. The starting point of digitization and automation 
is standards, laws, and the associated hurdles of formalizing the law. Viktor von 
Knapp attempted to transfer parts of divorce and alimony law to a computer and laid 
out early on the central role that the problem of formalizing legal processes plays in 
automation (Gräwe, 2011) (Knapp, 1963).
The formalization of law is sometimes described as both impossible and undesir-
able. Legal language could by no means be considered unambiguous and precise. 
This also results from the aim of the law to reflect the complexities of real-life situ-
ations within a regulatory framework. To accomplish this, a certain degree of ambi-
guity is intentionally incorporated to enable decision-making through subsumption 
and assessment by individuals. The formalization of legal terms is limited in theory 
and practice, e.g., by missing specifications of local or temporal dimensions (e.g., 
“temporary”), by the use of different threshold values (e.g., for company sizes) or 
because of the use of terms which are used differently depending on the law or the 
legal field (e.g., “child,” “household,” “income,” or “habitual residence”) (Kar et al., 
2019) (Berger & Kolain, 2021). Concepts in the legal norm, such as “residence” 
or “minor,” must therefore be linked to clear definitions and criteria. Synonymous 
terms must be related via ontologies, and supposedly synonymous terms must be 
unambiguously resolved. Unambiguous, formalized legal terms are a prerequisite for 
a (partially) automated enforcement of laws in the form of “if–then” rules (Raabe 
et al., 2012). Despite all these difficulties, the need for clear definitional criteria does 
not necessarily mean that legal terms must be completely standardized, i.e., fully 
harmonized. In a report on the concept of “income,” the German National Stand-
ards Control Council examined the possibility of a more differentiated approach: the 
“modularization” of the concept of income (Normenkontrollrat, 2021).

8402
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
Administrative Authority’s Discretion
Through the increased automated processing of structured parts, administrative pro-
cedures that require human intervention, judgment, and the exercise of discretion 
become more visible (Ringeisen et al., 2018). The term “discretion” is used in this 
context to describe administrative latitude. These grant the responsible decision-
makers freedom of choice, within a certain legal framework, as to which decision 
they will make (). Such weighing processes for decisions are considered hurdles for 
automated decisions, and this is because administrative staff must intervene at this 
point and process the case. In these cases, however, partial automation should be 
considered, which can already lead to a considerable reduction in the workload (Kar 
et al., 2019).
The (non-)suitability of administrative processes for automation cannot be deter-
mined solely based on the discretion granted: Not all procedures that do not require 
discretion are suitable for automated processing. Reasons can be a lack of data avail-
ability, insufficient data quality, or complex fact-finding (Braun Binder, 2020). On 
the contrary, norms that grant discretionary powers do not necessarily mean that 
automation is ruled out (Etscheid, 2018). With rule-based systems, discretionary 
decisions can be “measured” in an automated manner if, for example, sufficient 
empirical knowledge or supreme court decisions are available from which rules on 
the mapping of the consideration criteria can be derived. This enables the formula-
tion of decision rules with test criteria and a weighting of these. Using the rule-
based systems, an automated discretionary decision can be made, which can also 
be justified by the system. It would also be conceivable to have a group of experts 
define the scope of the discretion (Commission, 2019).
Mechanically automated subsumption of cases in the sense of a “subsumption 
machine” is, therefore, only possible in exceptional cases. The term “subsumption 
machine,” frequently used in this context, is to be understood as a theoretical con-
struction still far from being implemented (Meder, 2020). This position is confirmed 
by legal informatics projects of the last 4 to 6 decades, which have not led to full 
automation of the actual subsumption process but have found their limits in assis-
tance systems (Raabe et al., 2012).
Availability and Quality of Data
To derive generally valid rules statistically, significant sets of similar events are 
necessary. Machine-learning systems can be used in administrative procedures only 
if the number of cases is sufficiently high. According to a study, approximately 
500,000 court rulings are issued annually in Germany (Kaulartz & Braegelmann, 
2020). However, based on case analysis, this number may be too low for AI train-
ing. The figure of 500,000 should not be seen as an absolute number; sufficient data 
depends on the specific task and the learning model approach chosen. In addition 
to the necessary amount of data, methods must be developed suitable for extracting 
rules from the existing data sets. If the data quality is sufficient, insights can also be 
gained through small-data analyses. For successful data analyses, the relationship 
of the data to the research question is crucial. For this, data must be available in 

8403
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
acceptable quantity and quality (Datenethikkommission, 2019). However, data, even 
if available in high quality, may not be suitable for the desired purpose and context 
due to the specific characteristics of the data set.
Data quality can play a role in very different ways; the decisive factor in determin-
ing the necessary quantity of data are the relationships between requirement, learning 
model, and data quality. In cases where it is impossible to obtain sufficient data in the 
necessary quantity or quality, synthetic data can be a possible solution (Raji, 2021). 
In the case of the fundamental suitability of synthetic data for the respective applica-
tion area, they can be generated in the necessary quantity, and the data quality can be 
measured during the creation process. Likewise, the bias of the data can be counter-
acted during the generation of the data. In practice, a combination of real and syn-
thetic data can be used, the so-called “augmentation.” For this purpose, real data are 
supplemented with synthetic data in such quantity that they cover a more extensive 
set of constellations than the real data alone would not (Wong et al., 2016).
Another key challenge to developing data-driven systems is the availability of 
productive inputs. Questions arise about the availability of the relevant data, such 
as whether the algorithm has access to all factors that state the facts. Access to all 
factors that decision-makers have to take into account must be ensured in any case 
(Oswald, 2018). This access requires linking to digital evidence and registers, stand-
ardized interfaces to the data sources, and ensuring the quality of the available data. 
This circumstance opens a wide range of new data protection issues that will not be 
discussed further here. The decisive factor will be which data must be made avail-
able to the machine-learning systems at which stage of development. If the machine-
learning system can be trained on a simulated register landscape with fictitious data 
and is only given access to the registers after the learning phase has been completed, 
this will certainly have to be evaluated differently than if the system has to be trained 
with access to real register data. Apart from data protection, it is also still unclear to 
what extent the quality of the learning results differs between real and synthetic reg-
ister data and how the results of such machine-learning systems would be evaluated.
Consideration of Bias
Learning data provided to machine-learning systems form the basis of their subse-
quent decisions. In simple terms, they copy the logic patterns already present in the 
data. Accordingly, systematic biases in the data can lead to discriminatory derived 
rules. Insufficient representativeness or a low number of cases of a social group in 
the training data may lead to distortions and, thus, not taking into account the spe-
cifics of this group (Datenethikkommission, 2019). Although it should be noted that 
discriminatory or unfair decisions can also be made by humans, using a system with 
discriminatory effects can have a broader impact. Therefore, in the development of 
machine-learning systems, the detection of systematic biases is crucial, especially, 
but not only, when used in decision-making processes involving individuals or legal 
entities. Since data-based systems only consider statistically significant factors, 
important reasons that speak for or against a decision can be left out. This is referred 
to as an omitted variable bias (Mehrabi et al., 2021). Training data are considered 
representative if they represent an exact and merely structurally reduced image of 

8404
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
the population—if this is not the case, we speak of a bias due to the selection of the 
training data (sampling bias) (Mehrabi et al., 2021). It is also conceivable that fac-
tors such as class, rank, or confessions enter into the decision, either as direct fac-
tors or through correlations to factors that should not be relevant and contradict the 
principle of equality before the law (discriminatory bias) (Zalnieriute et al., 2019). 
For the use of machine learning systems, it must be ensured that no discriminatory 
characteristics are taken into account and that the result is not distorted by correla-
tions in the data that are not causally related to the output (von Blumröder & Breiter, 
2020a, b).
The discussion about possible biases in the training data of machine-learning AI 
systems and the potentially reinforcing discriminatory effect can also be used as 
an opportunity to bring the problems now made visible into the political discourse 
(Datenethikkommission, 2019). A possible distortion of reality by the AI systems 
can thus, upon closer examination, also prove to be an established prejudice. Trans-
parency and insight can be used to design countermeasures to reduce prejudice and 
bias; from general awareness through open, transparent discourse to digital tools that 
can be used in the respective proceedings to draw attention to it or even to compen-
sate for the biases and prevent a possible error of judgment.
Transparency and Explainability
The transparency of AI systems is an essential prerequisite for their use. Important 
elements for explainability are information on how the algorithm was programmed, 
what influences it was exposed to in a possible learning phase, and how this inter-
action led to the concrete decision. The relevant literature distinguishes different 
degrees of explainability of data-based systems. Building on Lipton’s framework 
(Lipton, 2016), Waltl/Vogl have developed a model of explainability, differentiating 
between two types of transparency (Waltl & Vogl, 2018): those about system func-
tionalities—the general logic, purposes or meanings, and intended consequences—
and those about outcomes.
As shown in Fig. 1 based on Waltl/Vogl, a distinction can be made between the 
system’s transparency and the result’s transparency (Waltl & Vogl, 2018). The sys-
tem’s transparency includes information about the IT system, the algorithms used, 
and the data used—both the training data in the case of machine-learning systems 
and the processed data for the respective decision. In general, but especially in 
Fig. 1   Based on Waltl & Vogl, 2018

8405
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
applying automation in administrative procedures, the transparency and traceability 
of the result calculated by the machine are relevant.
Transparency of the System  The system’s transparency deals with the algorithms, 
rules, and calculations underlying a decision. In terms of the transparency of 
a system, a decision is transparent if it is technically comprehensible and can be 
explained (Zalnieriute, Moses, Lyria Bennett, & Williams, 2019). The transparency 
of the system functionality is given if the entire algorithm and its program compo-
nents, databases, training models, and input data are published—this comprehen-
sive publication may be opposed by the protection of business secrets (e.g., of the 
manufacturer or the supplier of the training data) or the protection of the AI system 
against manipulation by users (The Royal Society, 2019). In the case of machine-
learning systems, the origin and structure of training data, the input design, the input 
data, and the output design should be documented to create comprehensive transpar-
ency (Engelmann & Puntschuh, 2020).
The transparency of the technical functioning of an AI system is intended for 
experts (The Royal Society, 2019). This form of transparency can be relevant for 
potential supervisory authorities or for experts from society who can review AI 
systems. Regular assessment of the algorithm and its components can be used, for 
example, to improve predictive accuracy or to check the equal treatment of groups 
(Zalnieriute et al., 2019); or, in the case of rule-based systems, to safeguard the func-
tioning of the elements and to check that the derived information and rules underly-
ing the result are up to date.
For broader access from society, additional models and representations can be 
applied that can also be understood by people with little or no AI competence. 
One way of implementing this is to develop a modular system that can be “decom-
posed” so that the decision can be analyzed based on individual stages and a 
weighting of these stages, which can contribute to low threshold explainability 
(The Royal Society, 2019).
To reduce the risk of manipulation in the case of extensive system transparency, 
the “proxy” model approach was developed. Proxy models describe the correspond-
ing real AI system by a similar model without revealing the details of the developed 
algorithm to be disclosed. These interpretable models provide information about the 
basic mode of operation without allowing precise predictions about concrete deci-
sion ways (The Royal Society, 2019) and thus protect against manipulating the sys-
tem’s input by the users.
Another aspect that can contribute to transparency and subsequently to the 
acceptance of automated decisions is labeling automated decisions, especially in 
privacy-sensitive areas (Art. 13, 22 General Data Protection Regulation). Labe-
ling can be done utilizing symbols that are visually easy to grasp (Guckelberger, 
2019). The proposed AI regulation by the European Commission2 plans to regulate 
2  COM(2021) 206 final.

8406
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
transparency obligations in more detail in the form of information obligations for 
AI systems and, to this end, has defined categories in the proposal for when AI 
systems must be labeled; for example, in the case, that humans interact with a sys-
tem or systems record emotions.
Transparency of the Result  The focus of the transparency of results is the explain-
ability of an AI system’s outcome or decision. In the case of rule-based systems, the 
transparency of the result is ensured by the possibility of visualizing the decision-
making process and the possibility of natural language reasoning. This is different 
when using machine-learning systems, which can visualize their rules and deriva-
tions or justify their decision only in the case of semantic algorithms but without 
transparently presenting a derivation. For this reason, machine-learning systems are 
also called black-box systems, which can lead to correct results, but it is not compre-
hensible for humans how their result is calculated. In the legal domain, the question 
remains to what extent the comprehensibility of the motives of a decision is manda-
tory if the result can be checked for correctness with the existing legal framework.
Compared to machine-learning systems, rule-based AI systems still have the 
advantage of comprehensibility of results, both in technical system transpar-
ency and transparency of the result. The technical layperson can check the tex-
tual description of the result, as well as the decision path. High transparency, 
therefore, continues to be of great importance in the “age of machine learning” 
in applying the law. Rule-based systems are therefore suitable for the automation 
of administrative action, e.g., for creating individual concrete legal acts, but only 
in exceptional cases for the full automation of an entire law. Machine-learning AI 
systems have the advantage of not relying on the formalization of law but require 
qualitative, context-specific data in sufficient quantity.
Furthermore, the results and their rationale are incomprehensible to the techni-
cal layman, and ML systems are therefore referred to as black-box systems. Fur-
ther development cycles may lead to new decisions and decision patterns that are 
also untraceable.
Advances in the creation of natural language texts by machine-learning algo-
rithms show the potential to independently compose legal texts in the future with-
out knowing the actual legal context of the norms or the decisions. The potential 
lies in the interaction between humans and machines as assistance systems for 
legal users, which process the results generated by the AI system, for example, in 
a subsumption process.
Another variant of the transparency of results is the presentation of coun-
terfactual statements. Counterfactual statements show which data points would 
have to change for a desired result to occur. Multiple counterfactual scenarios 
can also be output since there are multiple desirable outcomes and multiple ways 
to achieve each of these outcomes (Wachter et al., 2017). While it is legally rel-
evant to inform the parties of the considerations that led to the award, it is further 
essential to learn, through the rationale for the decision, what factors would have 
to change in order to lead to a different decision.

8407
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
To what extent machine-learning systems will independently generate a decision 
is questionable. Humans will only check for deviations or provide further safeguards 
to protect against disadvantageous decisions, e.g., with the restriction that only posi-
tive decisions will be issued automatically.
Conclusions on the Transparency of AI Systems  Rule-based systems are highly effec-
tive in formulating digital-friendly laws because they can process large amounts of 
structured data and provide clear, concise results. On the other hand, machine-learn-
ing systems can be valuable as a support tool for legal professionals, but it is impor-
tant to acknowledge that these systems require a high degree of expert knowledge 
and that biases must be considered. With the increasing use of technology in the 
legal industry, both rule-based and machine-learning systems have the potential to 
improve the speed and accuracy of legal decision-making processes significantly.
Framework Conditions for the Use of AI in Administrative Procedures
The proposal for an EU regulation on AI has already set the course for a framework 
for using artificial intelligence. According to this, a risk-based approach is chosen 
for AI systems, which provides a code of conduct for systems without the high risk 
and sets concrete requirements for data, documentation, traceability, information 
provision, transparency, human supervision, as well as robustness and accuracy for 
systems with high risk. The European Commission’s White Paper on AI also focuses 
on the public sector. Accordingly, administrations in rural areas and public service 
operators should be prioritized in the dialog.
In the previous chapters, the challenges and use cases specific to rule-based and 
machine-learning systems were presented. In this chapter, based on a literature 
review, we set up frameworks to be considered when using AI systems to automate 
administrative procedures. For the framework conditions, we distinguish different 
levels, which we analyze, as shown in Fig. 2.
Individual Level
Assuming the case of (partially) automated administrative action, the interaction of 
humans and the influence of an AI-based assistance system on the decision corridor 
is crucial. In the current discourse on the use of AI-based systems, the safeguards 
of humans are cited as co-decision makers (“humans in the loop”): humans control 
and take the final decision. The “automation bias,” which has been known for more 
than 2 decades (Skitka et al., 1999), shows in different experimental constellations 
Fig. 2   Examples of framework conditions

8408
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
that humans rely on the recommendations of assistance systems, and experimental 
groups make better decisions without machine support. Another problem is the ten-
dency of people to selectively accept algorithmic advice if it corresponds to their 
pre-existing beliefs and stereotypes (Alon-Barkat & Busuioc, 2021). The “human 
in the loop” concept is, therefore, a sensitive safeguard that has now become estab-
lished as a standard but can ultimately also lead to undesirable results (Enarsson 
et al., 2021).
The partial automation of administrative action and the use of assistance systems 
to support administrative action should therefore be safeguarded at the individual 
level with measures to prevent disproportionate reliance on machine information 
or to counteract selective perception and use of information that reinforces existing 
beliefs (stereotypes). Especially in the case of systems that are developed to support 
legal users in their work—whether by adopting certain parts of the procedures or by 
providing decision support—these should be integrated into the design process at 
an early stage (user-centered design). In addition to joint design, the interaction of 
legal users with the system can be observed during the creation and test phases to 
calibrate it accordingly but also in order to be able to observe the effects on admin-
istrative action in the decision-making process. Beyond the test phases, continuous 
monitoring is recommended, in which the interaction with the system is observed. 
Here, particular attention should be paid to changes in the level of knowledge and 
judgment and to the way in which legal users deal with the information provided by 
the system.
Technical Level
IT security is a fundamental requirement in developing technical systems in the pub-
lic sector, so this aspect is not examined in detail. Specific aspects of automation 
systems are increased quality assurance of technical systems, transparency of sys-
tems, and the possibility of verifying results. The risk-based approach of the German 
Data Ethics Commission classifies automation systems in administrative action as at 
least under level 3 (Datenethikkommission, 2019). This is associated with require-
ments such as transparency obligations, risk impact assessment, or ex-post control 
procedures. Regarding transparency obligations, in particular, the transparency of 
information on the system used, which can only be checked by specialists, ideally, 
committees should be set up which have sufficient technical and financial resources 
to be able to check and evaluate systems on an ongoing basis and accordingly also 
have access to training data or different levels of technology. Training data analysis 
and monitoring for possible biases, e.g., biases reflected in historical data, should be 
ensured. Due to the use of possible personal data in the learning phase, evaluations 
by committees must be carried out with sensitivity and safeguarded by legal require-
ments that regulate the types, scope, and access of the data that can be used.
Quality assurance and documentation should be ensured for both the initial 
development and the further development of the systems. Limits to transparency 
and a comprehensible representation of IT systems are an increasing problem due 
to the composition of different components and modes of operation, which exists 
independently of the lack of comprehensibility of machine-learning AI systems. 

8409
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
Publishing the specific mode of operation and decision-making of the algorithm 
represents a comprehensible limit to transparency because an excess of transpar-
ency can create a risk of manipulation. One way of achieving system transpar-
ency despite all this is to use proxy model approaches, which present the basic 
functions but do not allow any further derivations for the purpose of manipulation 
by users. An even more far-reaching requirement is the “counterfactual explana-
tion” already described as part of the transparency of results, which shows which 
factors were missing in order to reach a positive decision (Wachter et al., 2017). 
In addition, in the case of administrative action, a particularly effective traditional 
safeguard can be provided by checking the results. (Partially) automated deci-
sions in administrative action can also be reviewed via the formal and material 
specifications, regardless of the technology used, via the results. This is done on 
an ongoing basis via individual complaints but can also be done continuously 
as a quality assurance measure with the help of random sampling by the author-
ity. This special feature of a review of the results of the (partially) automated 
decision enables continuous quality assurance, which, combined with appropri-
ate transparency, can be evaluated as a high-quality safeguard for automation and 
algorithmic decisions.
Organizational Level
The public sector and its authorities have a special responsibility in the develop-
ment and use of automated systems. The following aspects must be given special 
consideration:
The creation of general provisions for the necessary transparency and trace-
ability of systems for (partially) automated decision-making should be ensured. 
Continuous further development and quality assurance should therefore be estab-
lished. It must be ensured that the automation of administrative action corre-
sponds to the current state of the law and produces results that are both techni-
cally and professionally correct. To this end, quality assurance systems should be 
developed to consider and integrate technical and legal further development. In 
order to identify potential dangers and sources of error, the use of risk manage-
ment systems should be examined (Djeffal, 2019). Risk management systems can 
be used to establish an early warning system for legal violations (Martini, 2019).
In addition, further legal safeguards, such as labeling obligations, monitoring 
obligations, or extended legal remedies, up to and including retroactive healing of 
all incorrectly issued notices, should be examined. One question that still needs 
to be clarified for the future is how to deal with erroneous automated decisions 
that have already been issued and whether and what effect erroneous decisions 
have on other procedures. To this end, reviewing the established legal protection 
mechanisms in the context of automated procedures makes sense. It is impor-
tant to bear in mind that different procedures and their corresponding automa-
tion modes can have different positive and negative effects on different protected 
interests or constitutional principles.

8410
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
Societal Level
In view of the special responsibility of the public sector, an evaluation of the accept-
ance and possible consequences for society should be carried out before an AI 
application is developed or commissioned. In addition to careful planning, using 
automated administrative action may also be ethically imperative if positive effects 
are achieved, for example, in the case of targeted social transfer services through 
automated administrative procedures without the need for applications or if human 
bias can be ruled out through automated decisions. Due to the dynamic changes 
and unforeseeable or unpredictable side effects, continuous monitoring should also 
be ensured at the societal level, for example, through accompanying studies. The 
European Commission’s White Paper on Artificial Intelligence recommends the 
development of two ecosystems: First, an “ecosystem for excellence” should be cre-
ated between the public and private sectors that encompass the entire value chain. 
Furthermore, the European regulation of key elements should create an ecosystem 
for trust. In the context of this ecosystem of excellence, the question of competence 
building and continuing education also arises at the societal level. It is becoming 
increasingly important for legal practitioners to build up a fundamental interest in 
and knowledge of AI techniques such as machine learning.
Conclusions
The general digitization of administrative activities has a long tradition. For more 
than 5 decades, information technologies have been used for efficient and effective 
digital processes to streamline workflows. The high degree of formalization and the 
close legal ties of administrative action make administrative law particularly suitable 
for legal automation.
In this paper, we have presented potential applications, as well as hurdles that 
need to be encountered for the use of automated systems in administrative proce-
dures. In addition, we have created a set of framework conditions that need to be 
considered.
One of the most important aspects is that regulation of automated administrative 
procedures with external effects is necessary. In addition to careful planning, using 
automated administrative procedures may also be ethically advisable if positive 
effects are achieved, for example, in the case of targeted social transfer payments 
through automated administrative procedures. No-stop or simplified procedures 
reduce the barriers for citizens to access state benefits. In addition, the establishment 
of automated procedures relieves clerks of routine work and frees them to focus on 
more complex cases. In addition to cost-effectiveness, the quality of the procedures 
is also increased. Conditionally programmed administrative regulations as “if–then” 
rules are particularly suitable for automation. Any existing discretionary terms must 
be checked for their measurability to enable full automation of administrative proce-
dures throughout.
In developing and using AI systems for administrative procedures, the vari-
ous forms of biases must be considered. AI systems are complex—in the design, 

8411
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
development, and training phase, as well as in actual use, and especially in the inter-
action between the legal user and the AI system. Errors can occur at any of these 
stages, which can lead to inequity. Quality assurance of the development and opera-
tion, as well as transparency of the systems, must be ensured. The concept of safe-
guarding AI systems by final human decision-makers (“human in the loop”) is a 
safeguarding measure that should be viewed critically. In the worst case, this can 
legitimize biased or incorrect decisions by the AI through the human in the “deci-
sion loop.” Decisive factors include whether there are sufficient time and resources 
to make recommendations, whether sufficient specific competencies are ensured to 
critically scrutinize the calculated information or how “uncontroversial” it is, or how 
“incontrovertible” information is presented. The human bias additionally increases 
these risks.
Legal users must be integrated into the design process of IT systems at an early 
stage (user-centered design). In addition to the joint design, the interaction of the 
legal users with the system must be continuously monitored to identify negative 
effects at an early stage and to make design adjustments. Even before an AI appli-
cation is developed or commissioned, an evaluation of its acceptance and possible 
consequences for society as a whole should be examined. Because of the dynamic 
changes and unintended or unpredictable side effects, ongoing monitoring should 
also be carried out at the societal level.
Free access to legal data is a key foundation for the development and verifiabil-
ity of AI systems, access is important for verification for both rule-based AI and 
machine-learning AI. Because of potential biases and prejudices that may reside 
specifically in training data, access to and review of personal data must be ensured 
by independent bodies. The provision of legal data is gaining importance with the 
ongoing digitization and automation of the law, as well as the establishment of assis-
tance systems in applying the law. Shared data circles among participating organiza-
tions—from authorities to courts to companies—can lead to added value for all par-
ties involved. Furthermore, free and open access to non-personal legal data promotes 
innovation, democracy, and the rule of law, so exclusive access should be avoided.
In the event of widespread use of AI systems to support the application of the law, 
the dynamic development of law that, among other things, also societal changes, 
must be ensured. To this end, provisions must be made for the ongoing develop-
ment of the systems. Besides the potential advantages of the automation of the law 
and legal assistance systems, their use can also lead to a reduction or leveling of the 
quality of legal action.
This paper does not attempt to review the entire body of law when it comes to AI 
and law—rather, it offers an in-depth look at the potentials, limitations, and frame-
work conditions for the use of AI and automation in administrative procedures. In 
addition, the importance and possibilities for addressing transparency and explain-
ability for automating administrative procedures in the various AI systems are 
covered. It should be noted that this paper focuses on examples of automation of 
administrative procedures from Austria and Germany, where the principle of legal-
ity prevails. When analyzing Anglo-American scenarios, it is essential to remem-
ber that this paper was written from a continental European perspective. Further 
research includes, as indicated in the chapters above, the influence of data usage on 

8412
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
administrative procedures: If blockchain technology is used as a state registry and 
laypersons can change public registers by self-reporting, the effects would funda-
mentally change the role of public administration.
Legal informatics is now more than six decades young, and its research projects 
have fallen short of expectations, especially in terms of implementation and applica-
tion in legal practice. The causes are manifold but can be grouped into three problem 
areas. The first field is the complexity of the open legal language, which can be for-
malized only selectively. The second problem field is the legal subsumption process, 
which cannot be represented mathematically and logically. And the third field was 
the lack of computing power, data storage capacity, and availability of legal data. In 
the first two problem areas, no new theoretical foundations were laid. The question 
remains to what extent the technologies and legal data available today can help to 
overcome the first two existing hurdles. The field of legal informatics, in general, 
is called upon to lay the foundations for the effective regulation of digital societies. 
The natural laws of the digital world challenge the legal system that has evolved over 
the analog centuries. Satisfactory, effective regulation is needed for data use, AI 
development, social media platform operators, and cloud infrastructure operators. 
This requires knowledge about how digital technologies work and their impact, not 
only for effective government regulation but also to understand and mapping digital 
processes of business models.
Automation of administrative procedures requires standards and laws that are 
suitable for this aim. For the drafting of standards and laws suitable for automation, 
the cooperation of legal experts with enforcement experts and computer scientists is 
crucial. As an interdisciplinary team, law and technology can be thought through, 
and technology can be thought out and designed together. Existing data can be used, 
or new data can be created. Law has the responsibility to shape the digital trans-
formation that permeates all areas of life in an effective and balanced way and to 
develop the law for this purpose further.
Funding  Open access funding provided by Danube University Krems University for Continuing 
Education.
Data Availability  The authors confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available 
within the article.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​
licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.

8413
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
References
Alon-Barkat, S., & Busuioc, M. (2021). Decision-makers processing of AI algorithmic advice: Automa-
tion bias versus selective adherence. arXiv.
Aoki, N. (2020). An experimental study of public trust in AI chatbots in the public sector. Government 
Information Quarterly, 37(4), 101490.
Atkinson, K., Bench-Capon, T., & Bollegala, D. (2020). Explanation in AI and law: Past, present and 
future. Artificial Intelligence, 289, 103387.
Beierle, C., & Kern-Isberner, G. (2019). Regelbasierte Systeme. In C. Beierle, & G. Kern-Isberner, Meth-
oden wissensbasierter Systeme. Springer.
Berger, C., & Kolain, M. (2021). Recht digital: schwer verständlich »by design« und allenfalls teilweise 
automatisierbar? kompetenzzentrum öffentliche IT.
Berglind, N., Fadia, A., & Isherwood, T. (2022). Mckinsey.com. Retrieved from https://​www.​mckin​sey.​
com/​indus​tries/​public-​and-​social-​sector/​our-​insig​hts/​the-​poten​tial-​value-​of-​ai-​and-​how-​gover​nments-​
could-​look-​to-​captu​re-​it
Boehme-Neßler, V. (2008). Unscharfes recht - überlegungen zur relativierung des rechts in der digitalisi-
erten welt, schriftenreihe zur rechtssoziologie und rechtstatsachenforschung.
Braun Binder, N. (2020). Als verfügungen gelten anordnungen der maschinen im einzelfall: dystopie oder 
künftiger Verwaltungsalltag?
Braun Binder, N., & Spielkamp, M. (2021). Einsatz künstlicher intelligenz in der Verwaltung.
BT-Drucksache V/3355. (1968). Retrieved from https://​dserv​er.​bunde​stag.​de/​btd/​05/​033/​05033​55.​pdf
BT-Drucksache VI/648. (1970). Retrieved from https://​dserv​er.​bunde​stag.​de/​btd/​06/​006/​06006​48.​pdf
Carter, S., & Nielsen, M. (2017). Using Artificial Intelligence to Augment Human Intelligence.
Collenette, J., Atkinson, K., & Bench-Capon, T. (2023). Explainable AI tools for legal reasoning about 
cases: A study on the European Court of Human Rights. Artificial Intelligence, 317, 103861.
Commission, G. D. (2019). Gutachten der Datenethikkommission.
Corrales, M., Fenwick, M., & Haapio, H. (2019). Legal tech, smart contracts and blockchain. Springer.
Crawford, K., & Schultz, J. (2019). AI systems as state actors. Columbia Law Review, 119(7), 1941–1972.
Danish Agency for Digitization. (2018). Retrieved from guidance on digital-ready legislation - on incor-
porating digitisation and implementation in the preparation of legislation: https://​en.​digst.​dk/​media/​
20206/​en_​guida​nce-​regar​ding-​digit​al-​ready-​legis​lation-​2018.​pdf
Datenethikkommission. (2019). Gutachten der datenethikkommission. Berlin.
De Vries, H., Bekkers, V., & Tummers, L. (2015). Innovation in the public sector: A systematic review 
and future research agenda. Public Administration.
Desouza, K., Dawson, G., & Chenok, D. (2020). Designing, developing, and deploying artificial intel-
ligence systems: Lessons from and for the public sector. Business Horizons, 63(2), 205–213.
Djeffal, C. (2019). Künstliche Intelligenz. In T. Klenk, F. Nullmeier, & G. Wewer, Handbuch Digital-
isierung in Staat und Verwaltung.
Edelmann, N., & Mergel, I. (2022). The implementation of a digital strategy in the Austrian Public Sec-
tor. dg.o 2022, June 15–17, 2022, Virtual Event, Republic of Korea.
Enarsson, T., Enqvist, L., & Naarttijärvi, M. (2021). Approaching the human in the loop – legal perspec-
tives on hybrid human/algorithmic decision-making in three contexts. Information & Communica-
tions Technology Law, 31, 1.
Engelmann, J., & Puntschuh, M. (2020). KI im behördeneinsatz: erfahrungen und empfehlungen.
Etscheid, J. (2018). Automatisierungspotenziale in der Verwaltung. In R. Mohabbat Kar, B. Thapa, & 
P. Parycek, (Un)berechenbar? Algorithmen und Automatisierung in Staat und Gesellschaft. Berlin.
Fiedler, H. (1985). Entwicklung der Informationstechnik und Entwicklung von Methoden für die öffen-
tliche Verwaltung
Fon, V., & Parisi, F. (2006). Judicial precedents in civil law systems: A dynamic analysis. International 
Review of Law and Economics, 26(4), 519–535.
Forgó, N., & Zöchling-Jud, B. (2018). Das Vertragsrecht des ABGB auf dem Prüfstand: Überlegungen im 
digitalen Zeitalter. ÖJT.
Gasova, K., & Stofkova, K. (2017). E-government as a quality improvement tool for citizens’ services. 
Procedia Engineering, 192, 225–230.
Gräwe, S. (2011). Die Entstehung der Rechtsinformatik.
Guckelberger, A. (2019). Öffentliche Verwaltung im Zeitalter der Digitalisierung.

8414
	
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415
1 3
Gupta, K. (2019). Artificial intelligence for governance in India: Prioritizing the challenges using ana-
lytic hierarchy process (AHP). Int. J. Recent Technol. Eng, 8, 3756–3762.
Hattenhauer, D. (1995). Das ALR im Widerstreit der Politik. In Wolff, Das Preußische Allgemeine 
Landrecht.38.
Horton, S. (2011). 3 Contrasting Anglo-American and Continental European civil service systems. In A. 
Massey, International Handbook an Civil Service Systems (pp. 31–53).
Houy, C., Hamberg, M., & Fettke, P. (2019). Robotic process automation in public administrations. In M. 
Räckers, Digitalisierung von Staat und Verwaltung. Bonn.
Justesen, L., & Plesner, U. (2022). The double darkness of digitalization: Shaping digital-ready legis-
lation to reshape the conditions for public-sector digitalization. Science, Technology, and Human 
Values, 47(1), 146–173.
Kantorowicz, H. (1925). Aus der Vorgeschichte der Freirechtslehre.
Kar, R., Thapa, B., Hunt, S., & Parycek, P. (2019). Recht digital: Maschinenverständlich und 
Automatisierbar.
Kaulartz, M., & Braegelmann, T. (2020). Rechtshandbuch artificial intelligence und machine learning.
Kirste, M. (2019). Augmented intelligence – Wie Menschen mit KI zusammen arbeiten. In V. Wittpahl, 
Künstliche Intelligenz.
Knapp, V. (1963). Über die Möglichkeiten der Anwendung kybernetischer Methoden in Gesetzgebung 
und Rechtsanwendung.
Lachana, Z., Alexopoulos, C., Loukis, E., & Charaladibis, Y. (2018). Identifying the different genera-
tions of Egovernment: an analysis framework. The 12th Mediterranean Conference on Information 
Systems (MCIS).
Legrand, P. (1996). European legal systems are not converging. The International and Comparative Law 
Quarterly, 45(1), 52–81.
Lessig, L. (1999). Code: And other laws of cyberspace.
Lipton, Z. (2016). The Mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpret-
ability is both important and slippery. Queue, 16(3), 31–57.
Martini, M. (2019). Blackbox Algorithmus - Grundfragen einer Regulierung Künstlicher Intelligenz.
Meder, S. (2020). Rechtsmaschinen: Von Subsumtionsautomaten, Künstlicher Intelligenz und der Suche 
nach dem "richtigen" Urteil.
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., & Galstyan, A. (2021). A survey on bias and fair-
ness in machine learning. ACM Computing SurveysVolume, 54(6), 1–35.
Mohun, J., & Roberts, A. (2020). Cracking the Code - Rulemaking for Humans and Machines. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1787/​19934​351
Munn, L. (2021). More than a mob: Parler as preparatory media for the U.S. Capitol storming. First 
Monday.
Munn, Z., Peters, M., Stern, C., Tufanaru, C., McArthur, A., & Aromataris, E. (2018). Systematic review 
or scoping review? Guidance for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping review 
approach. BMC Medical Research Methodology.
Munn, Z., Pollock, D., Khalil, H., Alexander, L., McInerney, P., Godfrey, C., . . . & Tricco, A. (2022). 
What are scoping reviews? Providing a formal definition of scoping reviews as a type of evidence 
synthesis. JBL Evidence Synthesis.
Normenkontrollrat, N. (2021). Digitale Verwaltung braucht digitaltaugliches Recht.
Novak, A.-S., Huber, V., & Virkar, S. (2021). Digital legislation: Quo vadis? ACM International Confer-
ence Proceeding Series, (p. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series).
Oswald, M. (2018). Algorithm-assisted decision-making in the public sector: Framing the issues using 
administrative law rules governing discretionary power.
Peters, M., Godfrey, C., Khalil, H., McInerney, P., Parker, D., & Soares, C. (2015). Guidance for conduct-
ing systematic scoping reviews. International Journal of Evidence-Based Healthcare.
Pohle, J. (2022). ’A legal discipline of the future’ – a short history of the intersection of law and computer 
science. HIIG Discussion Paper Series No. 2022–05.
Raabe, O., Wacker, R., Oberle, D., Christian, B., & Funk, C. (2012). Recht ex machina.
Raji, B. (2021). Rechtliche Bewertung synthetischer Daten für KI-Systeme.
Ringeisen, P., Bertolosi-Lehr, A., & Demaj, L. (2018). Automatisierung und Digitalisierung in der öffen-
tlichen Verwaltung: digitale Verwaltungsassistenten als neue Schnittstelle zwischen Bevölkerung 
und Gemeinwesen.
Rühl, G. (2020). Künstliche Intelligenz und gerichtliche Streitbeilegung. In T. Braegelmann, & M. Kaulartz, 
Rechtshandbuch Artifical Intelligence und Machine Learning. C.H. Beck.

8415
1 3
Journal of the Knowledge Economy (2024) 15:8390–8415	
Savigny, F. (1814). Vom Beruf unsrer Zeit für Gesetzgebung und Rechtswissenschaft. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
11588/​diglit.​11451
Scalia, A. (1995). Common-law courts in a civil-law system: The role of the United States Federal Courts 
in Interpreting the Constitution and Laws. Princeton University.
Schmidt, C., Krimmer, R., & Lampoltshammer, T. (2021). "When need becomes necessity" - the single 
digital gateway regulation and the once-only principle from a European point of view. Open Identity 
Summit.
Scholz, R., Kley, M., & Parycek, P. (2020). Digital infrastructure as a public good: A European 
perspective.
Skitka, L., Mosier, K., & Burdick, M. (1999). Does automation bias decision-making? International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 51(5), 991–1006.
Sucharew, H., & Macaluso, M. (2019). Methods for research evidence synthesis: The scoping review 
approach. Journal of Hospital Medicine, 14, 7
The Royal Society. (2019). Retrieved from Explainable AI.
Timmermann, D. (2020). Legal-Tech Anwendungen. Nomos.
Toll, D., Lindgren, I., Melin, U., & Madsen, C. (2019). Artificial intelligence in Swedish Policies: Values, ben-
efits, considerations and risks. Electronic Government, 301–310.
Umbach, G., & Tkalec, I. (2022). Evaluating e-governance through e-government: Practices and chal-
lenges of assessing the digitalisation of public governmental services. Evaluation and Program 
Planning, 93, 102118.
von Blumröder, L., & Breiter, A. (2020a). Die nutzung maschineller lernsysteme für den erlass verwal-
tungsrechtlicher ermessensentscheidungen.
von Blumröder, L., & Breiter, A. (2020b). Die Nutzung maschineller Lernsysteme für den Erlass verwal-
tungsrechtlicher Entscheidungen. dms.
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Russell, C. (2017). Counterfactual explanations without opening the black 
box: Automated decisions and the GDPR. Harv. JL & Tech 31.
Wagner, J. (2020). Legal Tech und Legal Robots: Der Wandel im Rechtswesen durch neue Technologien 
und Künstliche Intelligenz.
Waltl, B., & Vogl, R. (2018). Explainable artificial intelligence - the new frontier in legal informatics. 
Jusletter IT.
Wong, S., Gatt, A., Stamatescu, V., & Mark, M. (2016). Understanding data augmentation for classifica-
tion: When to warp?
Zalnieriute, M., Moses, L. B., & Williams, G. (2019). The rule of law and automation of government 
decision-making. Modern Law Review, 425.
Zuiderwijk, A., Chen, Y.-C., & Salem, F. (2021). Implications of the use of artificial intelligence in 
public governance: A systematic literature review and a research agenda. Government Information 
Quarterly, 38(3), 101577.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
