1 
 
A Tour of Unsupervised Deep Learning for 
Medical Image Analysis 
Khalid Raza* and Nripendra Kumar Singh  
Department of Computer Science, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi 
kraza@jmi.ac.in 
December 13, 2018 
Abstract 
Interpretation of medical images for diagnosis and treatment of complex disease from high-
dimensional and heterogeneous data remains a key challenge in transforming healthcare. In the last 
few years, both supervised and unsupervised deep learning achieved promising results in the area of 
medical imaging and image analysis. Unlike supervised learning which is biased towards how it is 
being supervised and manual efforts to create class label for the algorithm, unsupervised learning 
derive insights directly from the data itself, group the data and help to make data driven decisions 
without any external bias. This review systematically presents  various unsupervised models applied 
to medical image analysis, including autoencoders and its several variants, Restricted Boltzmann 
machines, Deep belief networks, Deep Boltzmann machine and Generative adversarial network. 
Future research opportunities and challenges of unsupervised techniques for medical image analysis 
have also been discussed. 
 
Keywords: Unsupervised learning; medical image analysis; autoencoders; restricted Boltzmann 
machine; Deep belief network 
1. Introduction 
Medical imaging techniques, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron 
emission tomography (PET), computed tomography (CT), mammography, ultrasound, X-ray 
and digital pathology images, are frequently used diagnostic system for the early detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of various complex diseases (Wani & Raza, 2018). In the clinics, the 
images are mostly interpreted by human experts such as radiologists and physicians. Because 
of major variations in pathology and the potential fatigue of human experts, scientists  and 
doctors have started using computer-assisted interventions. The advancement in machine 
learning techniques, including deep learning, and availability of computing infrastructure 
through cloud computing, have given fuel to the field of computer-assisted medical image 
analysis and computer-assisted diagnosis (CAD). Deep learning is about learning 
representations, i.e, learning intermediate concept or features which are important to capture 
dependencies from input variables to output variables in supervised learning, or between 
subsets of variables in unsupervised learning. Both supervised and unsupervised machine 
learning approaches are widely applied in medical image analysis; each of them has their own 
pros and cons. Some of widely used supervised (deep) learning algorithms are Feedforward 
Neural Network (FFNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and so on (Jabeen et al., 2018). There are many 

2 
 
scenarios where human supervisions are unavailable, inadequate or biased and therefore, 
supervised learning algorithm cannot be directly used. Unsupervised learning algorithms, 
including its deep architecture, give a big hope with lots of advantages and have been widely 
applied in several areas of medical and engineering problems including medical image 
analysis. 
This chapter presents unsupervised deep learning models, its applications to medical image 
analysis, list of software tools/packages and benchmark datasets; and discusses opportunities 
and future challenges in the area. 
2. Why Unsupervised Learning? 
In the majority of machine learning projects, the workflow is designed in a supervised way, 
where the algorithm is guided by us what to do and what not to! In such supervised 
architecture the potential of the algorithms are limited in three ways, (i) A huge manual effort 
to create labels and (ii) Biases related to how it is being supervised, which probabilities the 
algorithm to think for other corner cases during problem solving, and (iii) Reduce the 
scalability of target function at hand.  
To intelligently solve these issues, unsupervised machine learning algorithm can be used. 
Unsupervised machine learning algorithms not only derives insights directly from the data 
and group the data, but also uses these insights for data-driven decisions making. Also, 
unsupervised models are more robust in the sense that they act as a base for several different 
complex tasks where these can be utilized as the holy grail of learning and classification. In 
fact, the classification is not the only task that we do; rather, other tasks such as compression, 
dimensionality reduction, denoising, super resolution and some degree of decision making 
are also performed. Therefore, it is rather more useful to construct a model without knowing 
what tasks will be at hand and we will use representation (or model) for. In a nutshell, we can 
think of unsupervised learning as preparation (preprocessing) step for supervised learning 
tasks, where unsupervised learning of representation may allow better generalization of a 
classifier (Jabeen et al., 2018). 
 
3. Taxonomy of Unsupervised Learning Tasks 
In unsupervised learning, we group the unlabeled data set on the basis of underlying hidden 
features. By grouping data through unsupervised learning, at least we learn something about 
raw data. 
3.1 Density estimation 
Density estimation is one of the popular categories of unsupervised learning which discovers 
the intrinsic feature and structure of large and complex unlabeled data set via another non-
probabilistic approach. Density estimation is a non-parametric method which doesn’t possess 
much restriction and distributional assumption unlike parametric estimation. 

3 
 
Estimation of univariate or multivariate density function without any prior functional 
assumptions get almost limitless function from data. There are some widely used non-
parametric methods of estimation. 
3.1.1 Kernel density estimation 
Kernel density estimation (KDE) uses statistical model to produce a probabilistic distribution 
that resembles an observed variable as a random variable. Basically, KDE is used for data 
smoothing, exploratory data analysis and visualization. A large number of kernels have been 
proposed, namely normal Gaussian mixture model and multivariate Gaussian mixture model. 
Some of the advantages of Kernel density estimation are: 
o No need for model specification (data speaks itself). 
o Estimation converges to any density, shape with sufficient sample. 
o Easily generalizes to higher dimension. 
o Densities are multivariate and multimodal with irregular cluster shape. 
3.1.2 Histogram density estimation 
Histogram based technique mainly adds smoothness of the density curve of reconstruction 
which can be optimized by kernel parameters and closely related to KNN density estimation 
algorithm (Bishop et al., 2006). 
3.2 Dimensionality reduction 
Why dimensionality reduction? There has been a tremendous increase in deployment of 
sensors and various imaging technique’s which are being used in industry and medical 
diagnosis continuously record data and store it to be analyzed later. Lots of redundancy or 
noises are present initially when data are captured. For example, let us take a case of a patient 
having bone fracture. Initially doctors suggested for X-ray images which is a 2D/3D imaging, 
but when they do not find it helpful in diagnosis, then a CT scan and/or MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) may be taken which gives more detailed results for further right 
diagnosis. Now assume that an analyst sits with all this data to analyze and identified all 
important variables/dimensions which have most significant information’s and left all 
unwanted parts of data. This is the problem of high unwanted dimension removal and needs 
treatment of dimension reduction. Dimension reduction is the process of reducing higher 
dimension data set into a lesser dimension, ensuring that final reduced data must convey 
equivalent information concisely. 
Let’s look at figure shown below. It shows two-dimensional x and y which are measurement 
of several objects in cm (x1) and inches (y1), if you continue to use both dimensions in 
machine learning problems it will introduce lots of noise in the system. So, it is better to just 
use one-dimension (z1) and they will convey similar information. 

4 
 
 
Fig 1. Representation of data in two dimensional and one dimensional space 
There are some common methods to perform dimensionality reduction: 
S.1.2 
Factor analysis 
Some variables in given data are highly correlated. These variables can be grouped on the 
basis of their correlations. This means a particular group can have highly correlated variable, 
but have low correlation with variables of other groups. Each group represents single inherent 
construct or factor. As compared to data having large number of dimensions, these factors are 
small in number, while these factors are difficult to find. There are two methods for doing 
factor analysis: (i) Exploratory Factor Analysis, (ii) Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
 
3.2.2 Principal component analysis 
A set of variables, which are linear combination of the original set of variables, performs 
higher dimensional space mapped to lower dimensions in such a way that variance of data in 
lower dimensional space is maximized. These new set of variables is known as principle 
components.  
Let’s consider a situation of two-dimensional data set, there can be only two principal 
components, first principal component is the most possible variation of original data and 
second principal component is orthogonal to the first principal component, as shown in Fig. 
2. 

5 
 
 
Fig. 2 Principle components on a two-dimensional data 
In practice, a simple principal component analysis (PCA) can be used to construct the 
covariance or correlation matrix of the data and compute the eigenvectors. The eigenvectors 
correspond to the largest eigenvalues (principal component) are used to reconstruct a large 
fraction of variance of original data. As a result, it is left with lesser number of eigenvector 
and original space has been reduced. There might be chances of loss of data, but it is retained 
by most important eigenvectors. 
Consider a matrix U(m) which stored empirical mean of input matrix R, 
 ( )   
 
 ∑
 (   )          (              )                     ( )
 
   
 
 
Calculate a normalized matrix X,  X = (R – Ue), where e is a unitary vector matrix of size N. 
Finally, the mean square error (E2) is calculated in which smallest eigenvalues are removed, 
        (   ( ))   ∑
  
 
   
  ∑
  
 
     
                         (2) 
The trace(A) is the sum of all eigenvalues. Simple PCA is not capable of constructing 
nonlinear mapping, however, can implement nonlinear classification by using kernel 
techniques. 
3.2.3 Kernel PCA  
Kernel PCA is a nonlinear extension of conventional PCA, which is designed for 
dimensionality reduction of nonlinear subspaces depending on magnitude of input data and 
problem setup. In medical image analysis, hybrid kernel PCA is frequently used to get better 
results in unsupervised deep learning training model. Fischer et al. (2017) proposed an 
unsupervised deep learning illumination invariant kernel PCA, which is applied to each patch 
of respiratory signal extraction from X-ray fluoroscopy images leading to a set of low-
dimensional embedding.  

6 
 
A kernel PCA comprised a kernel matrix K and kernel function k(.) is a Mercer kernel 
(Minh et al. 2006), defined as Ki j  = k(x(i) , x(j)),such that k(.) return dot product of feature 
space. Now mapping of an eigenvalue of the kernel matrix, the Eigen decomposition and 
respected eigenvectors are computed as, 
λ{i}e{i} = K e{i}  
                                                 (3) 
 ( )  
 
 * + ∑
 * + ( ( )  )
 
   
 
 
 
(4) 
where λ{i} is eigenvalues and e{i} is eigenvectors of K; T is the number of training sample x to 
the principal component “i”. Fischer et al. (2017) analyzed different methods like PCA, 
KPCA and Multi-Resolution PCA to Diaphragm tracking correlation coefficient between 
different versions of the same sequence and agreed that Multi-Resolution PCA produce the 
best result among most of the parameters. Principal component analysis network (PCANet) is 
a simple network architecture and one of the benchmark frameworks (Chan et al. 2015) for 
the unsupervised deep learning in recent time. However, Shi et al. (2017) propose an 
encoding as C-RBH-PCANet which is improved PCANet to effectively integrate the color 
pattern extraction and random binary hashing method for learning feature from color 
histopathological images. 
3.3 Clustering 
Clustering is an unsupervised classification of unlabeled data (patterns, data item or feature 
vectors) into similar groups (clusters) (Fig. 3). Cluster analysis is explanatory in nature to 
find structure in data (Jain, 2008). Some model of clustering includes semi-supervised 
clustering, ensemble clustering, simultaneous feature selection and large-scale data clustering 
were emerging as a hybrid-clustering. It involves analysis of multivariate data and applied in 
various scientific domains where clustering technique is utilized, such as machine learning, 
image analysis, bioinformatics, pattern recognition, computer vision and so on. 
 
Fig. 3 An illustration of data clustering 

7 
 
Clustering algorithm is broadly divided into two groups: hierarchal clustering and partitional 
clustering, as described below. 
3.3.1 Hierarchical clustering 
Hierarchical clustering algorithms find clusters recursively (using previously established 
cluster). These algorithms can be either in the agglomerative mode (bottom-up) in which 
begin with each element as a separate cluster, merge the most similar pair of clusters 
successively into large clusters, or in divisive (top-down) mode which begin with all elements 
in one cluster, recursively divide into smaller clusters. A hierarchical clustering algorithm 
yields a dendrogram representing group of patterns and similarity level (Jain et al., 1999). A 
detailed discussion can be found in Jain et al. (1999). 
3.3.2 Partitional (k-means) clustering 
One of the most popular partitioning clustering algorithms is k-means. In spite of several 
clustering algorithms published in over 50 years, k-means is still widely used (Jain, 2010). 
The most frequently used functions in partitional clustering is squared error criterion, which 
applied to isolate and compact clusters. Let X = {xi: i = 1, 2, 3, …. N} be the set of n d-
dimensional elements clustered into set of K clusters as C = {ck : k = 1, 2, 3,…K}. To find 
partitions, squared error between empirical mean of a cluster and elements in the cluster is 
minimized. Let µk be the mean of the cluster (ck), the squared error between mean and 
elements in a cluster is defined as: 
 (  )  ∑‖     ‖ 
     
                                                     ( ) 
The main objective of K-means is to minimize the sum of squared error for all k clusters 
(Drineas et al., 1999). 
 ( )  ∑∑‖     ‖ 
     
 
   
                                               ( ) 
Minimizing objective function is  an NP-hard problem even for k = 2. Thus, k-means is a 
greedy algorithm and it can only be expected to converge to local minima. 
4. Unsupervised deep learning models 
This section  introduces a formal introduction  of unsupervised deep learning concepts, 
models and architectures that are used in medical image analysis. The unsupervised deep 
learning models can be roughly classified as shown in Fig. 4. 

8 
 
 
Fig. 4 Unsupervised deep learning models 
4.1 Auto-encoders and its variants 
In the literature, autoencoders and its several variants are reported and are being extensively 
applied in medical image analysis.  
4.1.1 Autoencoders and Stacked autoencoder 
Autoencoders (AEs) (Bourlard et al., 1988) are simple unsupervised learning model consist 
single-layer neural network that transforms the input into a latent or compressed 
representation by minimizing the reconstruction errors between input and output values of the 
network. By constraining the dimension of latent representation (may be from different input) 
it is possible to discover relevant pattern from the data. AEs framework defines a feature to 
extract function with specific parameters (Bengio et al., 2013). Basically, AEs are trained 
with specific function fƟ is called encoder and h = fƟ(x) is feature vector or representation 
from input x, another parameterized function gƟ called decoder, producing input space back 
from feature space. In short, basic AEs are trained to minimize reconstruction error in finding 
a value of parameter  , given by, 
   ( )   ∑ .    〖( 〗 ( ))/                              ( ) 
This minimization optionally followed by a non-linearity (most commonly used for encoder 
and decoder) as given by, 
Unsupervised 
deep learning 
models 
Autoencoders 
(AEs) & 
Variants 
Restricted 
Boltzmann 
Machines 
(RBMs) 
Deep Belief 
Networks 
(DBNs) 
Deep 
Bolzmann 
Machines 
(DBMs) 
Generative 
adversarial 
networks 
(GANs) 

9 
 
  ( )     (    )                                                     ( ) 
  ( )     (     )                                                 ( ) 
where Sf and Sg are encoder and decoder activation function (normally, sigmoid,  hyperbolic 
tangent or an identity function), respectively; parameters of model   = {W, b, W’, d}, where 
W and W’ are encoder decoder weight matrices, and b and d are encoder and decoder bias 
vector, respectively. Moreover, regularization or sparsity constraints may be applied in order 
to boost the discovery process.  In case, hidden layer has the same input as the input layer, 
and no any non-linearity is added, the model would simply learn an identity function. Fig. 
5(a) illustrates the basic structure of AE.  
Stacked autoencoders (SAEs) are constructed by organizing AEs on top of each other also 
known as deep AEs. SAEs consist of multiple AEs stacked into multiple layers where the 
output of each layer is wired to the inputs of the successive layers Fig. 5(b). To obtain good 
parameters, SAE uses greedy layer-wise training. The benefit of SAE is that it can enjoy the 
benefits of deep network, which has greater expressive power. Furthermore, it usually 
captures a useful hierarchical grouping of the input (Shin et al., 2013). 
4.1.2 Denoising autoencoder 
Denoising autoencoder (DAEs) is another variant of the auto-encoder. Denoising investigated 
as a training criterion for learning to constitute better higher-level representation and extract 
useful features (Vincent et al. 2010). DAEs prevent the model from learning a trivial solution 
(Litjens G. et al., 2017) where the model is trained to reconstruct a clean input from the 
corrupted version from noise or another corruption.  his is done by corrupting the initial 
input x into x  by using a stochastic function x  ~ qD x   x . The corrupted input    is then 
mapped to a hidden representation y = fƟ(x ) = s(Wx  + b) and reconstruct z = gƟ’ (y). A 
schematic representation of DAE is shown in Fig.5(c). Parameter   and    are initialized 
randomly and trained using stochastic gradient descent in order to minimize average 
reconstruction error. The denoising autoencoders continue minimizing same reconstruction 
loss between clean X and reconstruction from Y. This continues maximizing a lower bound 
on the mutual information between input x and representation y, and difference is obtained by 
applying mapping fƟ to a corrupted input. Hence, such learning is cleverer than the identity, 
and it extracts features useful for denoising. 
Stack denoising autoencoder (SDAE) is a deep network utilizing the power of DAE (Bengio 
et al., 2007; Vincent et al., 2010) and RBMs in the deep belief network (Hinton & 
Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton et al., 2006).  
4.1.3 Sparse autoencoder 
The limitation of autoencoders to have only small numbers of hidden units can be overcome 
by adding a sparsity constraint, where a large number of hidden units can be introduced 
usually more than one input. The aim of sparse autoencoder (SAE) is to make a large number 
of neurons to have low average output so that neurons may be inactive most of the time. 

10 
 
Sparsity can be achieved by introducing a loss function during training or manually zeroing 
few strongest hidden unit activations. A schematic representation of SAE is shown in Fig. 
5(d). 
If the activation function of hidden neurons is aj, the average activation function of each 
hidden neuron j is given by  
     
 ∑[    ]
 
   
                                                           (  ) 
The objective of sparsity constraints is to minimize    so that    , where   is a sparsity 
constraint very close to 0 such as 0.05. 
To enforce sparsity constraints, a penalty term is added to cost function which penalizes ̂ , 
de-weighting significantly from  . The penalty term is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence 
between Bernoulli random variables, can be calculated as (Ng, 2013; Makhzani & Frey, 
2013), 
              ∑  (    ̂ )
  
   
                                           (  ) 
where    is number of neurons in the hidden layers,and index   is summing over the hidden 
units in the network. 
  (    ̂ )        
 ̂ 
  (   )      
   ̂ 
                             (  ) 
The property of penalty function is that   (      ̂ )   , if     ̂ , otherwise it increases 
gradually as  ̂ diverses for  . 
The k-sparse autoencoder (Makhzani & Frey 2013) is a form of sparse AE where k neurons 
having the highest activation function are chosen and the rest is ignored. The advantage of k-
sparse AE is that they allow better exploration on a data set in terms of percentage activation 
of the network. The advantage of SAE is the sparsity constraints which penalize the cost 
function and as a result degrees of freedom is reduced. Hence, it regularizes and maintains 
the complexity of the network by preventing over-fitting. 
4.1.4 Convolutional autoencoder  
The most popular and widely used network model in deep unsupervised architecture is 
stacked AE. Stacked AE requires layer-wise pre-training. When layers go deeper during the 
pre-training process, it may be time consuming and tedious because of stacked AE is built 
with fully connected layers. Li et al. (2017) propose first trial to train convolutional directly 
an end-to-end manner without pre-training. Guo et al. (2017) suggested convolutional 
autoencoder (CAE) that is beneficial to learn feature for images and preserving the local 
structure of data and avoid distortion of feature space. A general architecture of CAE is 
depicted in Fig. 5(c). 

11 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 (a)-(g) Diagrams showing networks of autoencoders and its different variants 

12 
 
4.1.5 Variational autoencoder 
Another variant of autoencoder, called variational autoencoder (VAE), was introduced as a 
generative model (Kingma &Welling, 2013). A general architecture of VAE is given in Fig. 4(f). 
VAEs utilize the strategy of deriving a lower bond estimator from the directed graphical models 
with continuous distribution of latent variables.  he generative parameter θ in the decoder 
(generative model) assist the learning process of the variational parameter, ϕ as encoder in the 
variational approximation model. VAEs apply the variational approach to latent representation, 
learning as additional loss component training estimators, known as stochastic gradient 
variational Bayes (SGVB) and Autoencoding variational Bayes (AEVB) (Kingma & Welling, 
2013). It Optimizes the parameter ϕ and θ for probabilistic encoder qϕ(z|x), which is an 
approximation to the generative model pθ(x, z), where z is latent variable and x is continuous or 
discrete variable. Its aim is to maximize the probability of each x in the training data set under 
entire generative process. However, alternative configuration of generative latent variable 
modeling rises to give deep generative models (DGMs) instead of existing assumption of 
symmetric Gaussian posterior (Partaourides at el., 2017). 
4.1.6 Contractive autoencoder  
Rifai (2011) presented a novel approach for training deterministic autoencoder. Contractive 
autoencoder is additional of explicit regularizer in the objective function that enables the model to 
learn a function having slight variations of input values. This additional regularizer corresponds 
to the squared Forbenius norm of the Jacobian matrix of given activation with respect to the 
input. The contractive autoencoder is obtained with the regularization term in following equation 
yield final objective function, 
    ( )  ∑. (   ( ( ))    ‖   ( )‖
 
 /
    
                             (  ) 
The difference between contractive AE and DAE stated by (Vincent et al., 2010) as contractive 
AE explicitly encourage robustness of representation, whereas DAE stressed on the robustness of 
reconstruction this property make sense of contractive AE a better choice than DAEs to learn 
useful feature extraction. Table 1 presents a summary of autoencoders and its variants, and Table 
2 presents its applications for medical image analysis.  
Table 1.Summary of autoencoders and its variants 
Types 
Descriptions 
References 
Autoencoder  
One of the simplest form which aims to learn 
a representation (encoding) for a set of data. 
Ballard (1987);   
Bourlard & Kamp (1988) 
Stacking autoencoder 
An autoencoder having multiple layers where 
the outputs of each layers are given as inputs 
of the successive layer. 
Zabalza et al. (2016) 
Sparse autoencoder 
Encourages hidden units to be zero or near to 
zero 
Goodfellow et al. (2009) 
Denosing autoencoder 
Capable to predict true inputs from noisy 
data 
LeCun & Gallinari, (1987); 
Vincent et al. (2008) 
Convolutional autoencoder 
Learn feature, preserve the local structure of 
data and avoid distortion of feature space 
Guo et al. (2017) 
Variational autoencoder 
A generative model utilizing strategy of 
deriving a lower bond estimator from 
directed graphical models with continuous 
distribution of latent variables. 
Kingma & Welling (2013) 
Contractive autoencoder 
Forces encoder to take small derivatives 
Rifai et al. (2011) 

13 
 
Table 2 Applications of autoencoders and its variants for medical image analysis. 
[Abbreviations: H&E: hematoxylin and eosin staining; AD: Alzheimer’s disease; MCI: Mild cognitive 
impairment; fMRI: Functional magnetic resonance imaging; sMRI: Structural magnetic resonance imaging; rs-
fMRI: Resting-state fMRI; DBN: Deep belief network; RBM: Restricted Boltzmann machine] 
Method 
Task 
Image type 
Remarks 
References 
SAE 
AD/MCI classification 
MRI 
SAE accompanied by supervised fine 
tuning 
Suk & Shen (2013) 
SAE 
AD/MCI/HC 
classification 
MRI & PET 
Extraction of latent features on a huge 
set of  features obtained from MRI and 
PET images using SAE 
Suk et al. (2013a) 
SAE 
AD/MCI/HC 
classification 
MRI 
SAE used to pre-train 3D CNN 
Payan 
& 
Montana 
(2015) 
SAE 
MCI/HC classification  
fMRI 
SAE used for feature extraction, HMM 
as a generative model on top 
Suk et al. (2016) 
SAE 
Hippocampus 
segmentation 
MRI 
SAE used for representation learning 
and measure target/atlas patch  
Guo et al. (2014) 
SAE 
Visual 
pathway 
segmentation 
MRI 
SAE used to learn appearance features 
to 
steer 
the 
shape 
model 
for 
segmentation 
Mansoor et al. (2016) 
SAE 
Denoising DCE-MRI 
MRI 
Uses an ensemble of denoising SAE 
(pre-trained with RBMs). Denoising 
contrast-enhanced MRI sequences using 
expert DNNs (pre trained with RBMs) 
Benou et al. (2016) 
SSAE 
Nucleus detection 
Digital 
pathology 
image 
detection of nuclei on breast cancer 
digital histopathological images. 
Xu et al. (2016) 
SAE 
Stain normalization 
Digital 
pathology 
image 
SAE is applied to classify tissues and 
their subsequent histogram 
Matching 
Janowczyk 
et 
al. 
(2017) 
SAE 
Density classification 
Mammography 
Unsupervised CNN  with SAE to learn 
features from unlabeled data  for breast 
texture and  density classification 
Kallenberg 
et 
al. 
(2016) 
SAE 
Lesion classification 
MRI 
Learn to extract features from multi-
parametric MRI data, subsequently 
creates a hierarchical classification to 
detect prostate cancer. 
Zhu et al. (2017) 
 
SAE 
Detection 
of 
Heart, 
kidney 
and 
liver 
location  
MRI 
SAE used for acquisition of spatio-
temporal features on 2D along with time 
DCE-MRI 
Shin et al. (2013) 
SAE 
Cell segmentation 
Digital 
pathology 
image 
Learning spatial relationships 
Hatipoglu, N. 2017 
SAE 
Segmentation 
right 
ventricle 
in 
cardiac 
MRI  
MRI 
SAE applied to obtain an initial right 
ventricle  segmentation. 
Avendi, M. 2017 
SDAE 
Cell segmentation 
Digital 
pathology 
image 
The SDAE trained with data and their 
structured labels for cell segmentation 
Su. H. at el 2018 
SSAE 
AD 
MRI 
SSAE 
for 
early 
detection 
of 
Alzheimer’s disease from brain MRI  
Liu et al. (2014) 
SDAE 
Breast lesion 
Ultrasound and 
CT 
Stacked Denoising AE for Diagnosis of 
breast nodules and lesions 
Cheng et al. (2016) 
SDAE 
Patient clinical events 
Patient clinical 
history 
SDAE for an unsupervised  early 
prediction  of patients e future clinical 
events and disease. 
Miotto et al. (2016) 
SDAE 
-- 
CT/MRI 
Multi-modal SDAE used to pre-train the 
DNN. 
Cheng et al. (2018) 
DCAE 
Modeling task fMRI 
tfMRI 
Deep Convolutional AE to model 
tfMRI. 
Huang et al. (2018) 
 
CAE 
AD/MCI/HC 
classification 
fMRI 
CAE used to pre-train 3D CNN. 
Hosseini-Asl 
et 
al. 
(2016) 
CAE 
Nucleus detection 
Digital 
pathology 
image 
Sparse CAE to detect and encode nuclei 
and feature extraction from tissue 
section images. 
Hou et al. (2019) 

14 
 
4.2. 
Restricted Boltzmann Machines  
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are a variant of Markov Random Field (MRF), 
constitute of single layer undirected graphical model with an input layer or visible layer x = (x1, 
x2...... xN) and a hidden layer h = {h1, h2, …. HM}. The connection between nodes/units are 
bidirectional, so each given input vector x can take the latent feature representation h and vice-
versa. An RBM is a generative model which learns probability distribution over the given input 
space and generates new data point (Yoo, et al. 2014). Illustration of a typical RBM  is shown in 
Fig. 6(a). In fact, RBMs are restricted version of Boltzmann machines where neurons must form 
an arrangement of bipartite graphs. Due to this restriction, pairs of nodes belonging to each of the 
visible and hidden nodes have a symmetric connection between them, and nodes within a group 
have no internal connections.. This restriction makes RBM more efficient training algorithm than 
the general case of Boltzmann machine. Hinton et al. (2010) proposed a practical guide to train 
RBMs.  
RBMs have been utilized in various aspects of medical image analysis such as detection of 
variations in Alzheimer disease (Brosch, et al. 2013), image segmentation (Yoo et al. 2014), 
dimensionality reduction (Cheng et al. 2016), feature learning (Pereira et al. 2018) and so on. A 
brief account for the application of RMBs in medical image analysis is shown in Table 3. 
Table 3. Applications of RBM for medical image analysis 
Method 
Task 
Image type 
Remarks 
References 
RBM 
AD 
MRI 
Uses a large dataset of MRI to rule 
out the mode of variations in AD 
brains. 
Brosch et al. (2013) 
RBM 
Multiple 
sclerosis 
lesions 
3DMRI 
Uses multi-channel 3D MR images 
of multiple sclerosis (MS) lesion  
for MS segmentation 
Yoo et al. (2014) 
RBM 
AD/MCI/HC 
classification 
MRI, PET 
DBMs on multimodal images from 
MRI and PET scans for disease 
classification. 
Suk et al. (2014) 
RBM 
Mass detection in breast 
cancer 
Mammography 
RBM 
based 
method 
for 
oversampling and semi-supervised 
learning to solve classification of 
imbalanced data with a few labeled 
samples 
Cao et al. (2015) 
RBM 
fMRI 
blind 
source 
separation 
fMRI 
RBM used for both internal and 
functional interaction-induced latent 
source detection 
Huang et al. (2016) 
RBM 
Vertebrae localization 
CT, MRI 
RBMs to locate the exact position of 
the vertebrae. 
Cai et al. (2016b) 
RBM 
Benign/Malignant 
classification 
Ultrasound 
Shear wave elsatrography for class 
indication of benign and malignant 
mammary gland tumors using RBM. 
Zhang et al. (2016a) 
RBM 
Tongue 
contour 
extraction 
Ultrasound 
Analysis of tongue motion during 
speech, using auto encoders in 
combination with RBM. 
Jaumard-Hakoun et al. 
(2016) 
CRBM 
Lung 
tissue 
classification 
and 
airway detection 
CT 
Discriminative 
and 
generative 
learning by CRBM to develop filters 
for 
data 
training 
as 
well 
classification. 
Van Tulder & de Bruijne 
(2016) 
RBM 
Cardiac 
arrhythmia 
classification 
ECG 
Achieves 
average 
recognition 
accuracy 
for 
ventricular 
and 
supraventricular 
ectopic 
beats 
(93.63% and 95.57%, respectively) 
for 
Cardiac 
arrhythmia 
classification. 
Mathews et al. (2018) 
RBM 
Brain 
lesion 
segmentation 
MRI 
RBM is used for feature learning, 
and a Random Forest as a classifier. 
Pereira et al. (2018) 
 

15 
 
 
Fig. 6 (a)-(d) Diagrams showing various unsupervised network models 
4.3. 
Deep Belief Networks 
Deep Belief Networks (DBN) is a kind of neural network proposed by Bengio (2009). It is a 
greedy layer-wise unsupervised learning algorithm with several layers of hidden variables 
(Hinton et al., 2016). Layer-wise unsupervised training (Bengio 2007) help the optimization 
and weight initialization for better generalization. In fact, DBN is a hybrid single 
probabilistic generative model, like a typical RBM. In order to construct a deep architecture 
like SAEs where AEs layers are replaced by RBMs, DBN has one lowest  visible layer v, 
representing state of input data vector and a series of hidden layers h1, h2, h3, . . . hL. When 
multiple RBMs are stacked hierarchically,  an undirected generative model is formed by top 
two layers and  directed generative model is formed by lower layers. Fig. 6(b), illustrates the 

16 
 
structure of DBN. The following function in DBN represents the joint distribution of visible 
unit v, hidden layers hl (l = 1, 2…. L : 
P(               )   (∏
 (       ) (      ( ))
   
   
)             (14) 
Hinton at el. (2006a) applied layer-wise training procedure, where lower layers learns low-
level features and subsequently higher layers learns high-level features (Hinton at el. 1995). 
DBN are used to extract features from fMRI images (Plis et al., 2014), temporal ultrasound 
(Azizi et al. 2016), classify Autism spectrum disorders (Aghdam et al. 2018), and so on. 
Some of the applications of DBNs are presented in Table 4. 
Table 4. Applications of DBNs for medical image analysis 
Method 
Task 
Image type 
Remarks 
References 
DBN 
AD/HC classification 
MRI 
DBNs with convolutional RBMs 
for manifold learning 
Brosch & Tam (2013) 
DBN, 
Convolutional 
RBM 
Manifold Learning 
MRI 
DBM along with convolutional 
RBM layers to efficiently train 
DBMs 
in 
order 
to 
detect 
morphological changes in brain in 
normal 
as 
well 
as 
disease 
conditions 
Brosch et al. (2014) 
DBN 
 
MRI 
Evaluation of DBN to estimate 
brain networks in neurocognitive 
disorders 
like 
 
Huntington’s 
disease and Schizophrenia  
Plis et al. (2014) 
DBN 
AD/MCI/HC 
classification 
MRI 
A 
group 
of 
voting 
schemes 
clubbed using an SVM to better 
classify AD and MCI from brain’s 
3D gray mater images. 
Ortiz et al. (2016) 
DBN 
Left 
ventricle 
segmentation 
Ultrasound 
DBN assisted system exploiting 
non-rigid registration, landmarks 
and patches to maneuver multi 
atlas segmentation. 
Carneiro et al. (2012); 
Carneiro 
& 
Nascimento (2013) 
DBN 
Schizophrenia/NH 
classification 
MRI 
Characterizing 
differences 
in 
morphology 
of 
various 
brain 
regions in schizophrenia using 
DBN and supervised fine tuning. 
Pinaya et al. (2016) 
DBN 
Lesion classification 
Ultrasound 
Training DBN to extract features 
from 
prostate 
ultrasonography 
images to classify benign and 
malignant lesions. 
Azizi et al. (2016)  
DBN 
Left 
ventricle 
segmentation 
MRI 
The combination of DBN and level 
set method to yield automated 
segmentation of the left ventricle 
from cardiac cine MRI  
Ngo et al. (2017) 
DBN 
Cardiac 
arrhythmia 
classification 
ECG 
Achieves 
average 
recognition 
accuracy 
of 
ventricular 
and 
supraventricular 
ectopic 
beats 
(93.63% and 95.57%, respectively) 
for 
cardiac 
arrhythmia 
classification. 
Mathews et al. (2018) 
DBN 
Autism 
spectrum 
disorders classification 
rs-fMRI, 
sMRI 
Classifies 
Autism 
spectrum 
disorders (ASDs) in children using 
rs-fMRI and sMRI data on the 
basis of Random Neural Network 
clustering. 
Aghdam et al. (2018) 
 
 

17 
 
4.4. 
Deep Boltzmann Machine 
Deep Boltzmann machine (DBM) is a robust deep learning model proposed by Salakhutdinov 
et al. (2009) and Salakhutdinov et al. (2012). They stacked multiple RBMs in a hierarchal 
manner to handle ambiguous input robustly. Fig. 6(c) represents the architecture of DBM as a 
composite model of RBMs which clearly shows how DBM differ from DBN.  Unlike DBNs,  
DBMs form undirected generative model combining information from both lower and upper 
layers which improves the representation power of DBMs. Training of layer-wise greedy 
algorithm for DBM (Salakhutdinov et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2013b) is calculated by 
modifying in procedure of DBN. 
Recently, a three-layer DBM was presented by Salakhutdinov et al. (2015) and Dinggang et 
al. (2017). In this three-layer DBM, to learn parameters    *     +  the values of 
neighbour layer(s) and probability of visible and hidden units are computed using logistic 
sigmoidal function.  The derivative of log likelihood of the observation ( ) with respect to 
the model parameter( ) is computed as, 
 
  ( )    (   )        ,    (  )  -         ,    (  ) -                           (  ) 
 Where      [.] denote data-dependent obtained from visible units and       [.] denote 
data-independence obtained from the model. Some of the applications of DBMs are shown in 
Table 5. 
Table 5. Applications of DBMs for medical image analysis 
Method 
Task 
Image type 
Remarks 
References 
DBM 
Heart motion tracking 
 
MRI 
Using 
three-layered 
Deep 
Boltzmann Machine to guide 
frame-by-frame 
heart 
segmentation during radiation 
therapy of cancer patient on cine 
MRI images. 
Wu, et al., (2018) 
DBN 
AD/HC classification 
MRI 
DBN 
combined 
with 
convolutional 
RBMs 
for 
manifold learning. 
Brosch 
& 
Tam 
(2013) 
RBM 
Breast-image 
classification 
 
MRI 
Restricted Boltzmann machine 
with backpropagation have been 
used for histopathological breast-
image classification 
Nahid et al., (2018) 
DBM 
Medical image retrieval 
 
Multi digital 
image 
DBM based multi model learning 
to learn joint density model. 
 
Cao, et al., (2014) 
4.5. 
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) 
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow, et al. 2014) is one of recent promising 
technique for building flexible deep generative unsupervised architecture. Goodfellow et al. 
(2014) proposed two models generative model G and Discriminative model D, where G 
capture data distribution (pg)over real data t, and D estimates the probability of a sample 
coming from training data (m) not from G. In every iteration, backpropagation generator and 
discriminator competing with each other. The training procedure the probability of D is 

18 
 
maximized. This framework functions like a mini-max two-player game. The value function 
V(G, D) establishes following two-player mini-max game is given by, 
   
⏟
 
   
⏟
 
  (   )           ,    ( )-        ( ) 0    .   ( ( ))/1           (  ) 
Where D(t) represents the probability of t from data m and pdata is distribution of real-world 
data. This model seems to be stable and improved as pg = pdata. A typical architecture of GAN 
is depicted in Fig. 6(d). In fact, these two adversaries, Generator and Discriminator, 
continuously battle during the processing of training. GAN have been applied to generate 
samples of photorealistic images to visualize new designs. Some of the applications of GAN 
for medical image analysis are presented in Table 6. 
Table 6. Applications of GAN for medical image analysis 
Method 
Task 
Image 
type 
Remarks 
References 
GAN 
Synthesis of retinal 
images 
Retinal 
images 
 
MI-GAN generates precise 
segmented images for the 
application of supervised 
learning of retinal images. 
Iqbal & Ali (2018) 
 
GAN 
Chest X-ray 
X-ray 
GAN used to produce 
photorealistic images which 
retain pathological quality 
Canas, et al, (2018) 
 
Dual 
GAN-
FCN 
Segmentation 
of 
regions of interest 
(ROIs) 
 --- 
Improve  GAN using dual-
path adversarial learning for 
Fully Convolutional Network 
based image segmentation 
Bi, et al., (2018) 
GAN 
Simulation 
of 
B-
mode 
ultrasound 
images 
 
Ultrasound 
 
Conditional generative 
adversarial networks used to 
simulate ultrasound images at 
given 3D spatial locations. 
Hu et al., (2017) 
GAN 
Treatment 
of 
lymphomas and lung 
cancer 
PET 
Multi-channel generative 
adversarial networks used to 
synthesize PET data. 
Bi, et al., (2017) 
 
5. List of software tools/packages and benchmark datasets 
A plethora of software tools and packages implementing unsupervised learning models (as 
discussed in the paper) has been developed and made available to the research community 
and data analysts. Some of the tools/packages and medical images benchmark datasets are 
listed in Table 7 and Table 8, respectively.  
 
 

19 
 
Table 7. List of software tools/packages for unsupervised learning models 
S. No. 
Tools/ Packages 
Name 
Models/ 
Methods 
Description 
Language 
/Technology 
URL 
1. deeplearning4
j 
Autoencoders 
Deep learning APIs for Java 
having an implementation of 
several deep learning techniques. 
Java 
https://deeplearning4j.org/  
2. unsup under 
torch7 
Autoencoder, 
etc.  
A scientific computing 
framework with good support for 
machine learning algorithms that 
puts GPUs first. Unsup package 
provides few unsupervised 
learning algorithms such as 
autoencoders, clustering, etc. 
Lua 
https://github.com/torch/to
rch7 
3. DeepPy 
Autoencoders 
MIT licensed deep learning 
framework that runs on CPU or 
GPUs and implements 
autoencoders, in addition to other 
supervised learning algorithms. 
Python 
https://github.com/andersb
ll/deeppy 
http://andersbll.github.io/d
eeppy-website/ 
4. SAENET.train 
Stacked 
autoencoder 
Build a stacked autoencoder in R 
environment for pre-training of 
feed-forward NN and dimension 
reduction of features. 
R package 
https://rdrr.io/cran/SAEN
ET/man/SAENET.train.ht
ml  
5. kdsb17 
Convolutional 
autoencoder 
Gaussian Mixture Convolutional 
Autoencoder (GMCAE) used for 
CT lung scan using 
Keras/TensorFlow 
Python, 
Keras, 
Tensor-flow-
gpu 
https://github.com/alegonz
/kdsb17  
 
6. autoencoder 
Deep 
autoencoder 
Training a deep autoencoder for 
MNIST digits datasets 
Matlab 
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/
~hinton/code/Autoencoder
_Code.tar  
7. H2O 
Deep 
autoencoder 
Parallelized implementations of 
many supervised and 
unsupervised machine learning 
algorithms, including GLM, 
GBM, RF, DNN, K-Means, 
PCA,Deep AE, etc. 
R package 
https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/
h2o/ 
8. dbn 
DBN 
Deep belief network pre-train in 
unsupervised manner with stacks 
of RBM, which in return fine-
tuned DBN. 
R package 
https://rdrr.io/github/Timo
Matzen/RBM/src/R/DBN.
R  
9. darch 
DBN, RBM 
Restricted Boltzmann machine, 
deep belief network 
implementation 
R package 
https://github.com/maddin
79/darch  
10. deepnet 
DBN, RBM, 
deep 
autoencoders 
Implementation of RBM, DBN, 
deep stacked autoencoders 
R package 
https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/
deepnet/  
11. Vulpes 
DBN 
DBN and other deep learning 
implementation in F#. 
Visual 
Studio 
https://github.com/fsproje
cts/Vulpes 
12. pydbm 
DBM/ RBM 
RBM/DBM are implemented in 
python for pre-learning or 
dimension reduction 
Python 
https://pypi.org/project/py
dbm/  
13. RBM 
RBM 
Simple RBM implementation in 
Python 
Python 
https://github.com/echen/r
estricted-boltzmann-
machines  
14. xRBM 
RBM and its 
variants 
Implementation of RBM and its 
variants in Tensorflow 
Python 
https://github.com/omimo/
xRBM  
15. DCGAN.torch 
GAN 
Unsupervised representation 
learning using Deep 
Convolutional GAN 
Lua 
https://github.com/soumit
h/dcgan.torch  
16. pix2pix 
 
GAN 
Conditional Adversarial Networks 
for Image-to-image translation 
synthesizing from the image. 
Linux Shell 
Script 
https://github.com/phillipi/
pix2pix  
17. ebgan 
GAN 
Energy-based GAN equivalent to 
probabilistic GANs produces high 
resolution images. 
Python 
https://github.com/eriklind
ernoren/PyTorch-
GAN/tree/master/impleme
ntations/ebgan  

20 
 
Table 8. List of benchmark medical image datasets 
[Abbreviations. ADNI: Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; ABIDE: Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange; DICOM: Digital 
Imaging and Communications in Medicine; BCDR: Breast Cancer Digital Repository; CIVM: Center for in Vivo Microscopy; DDSM: 
Digital Database for Screening Mammography; DRIVE: Digital Retinal Images for Vessel Extraction; IDA: Image & Data Archive; ISDIS: 
International Society for Digital Imaging of the Skin; NBIA: National Biomedical Imaging Archive; OASIS: Open Access Series of 
Imaging Studies; TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas; TCIA: The Cancer Imaging Archive] 
S. No. 
Data set 
Modalities 
Medical 
condition 
Accessibility 
URL 
1. 
ABIDE 
MRI 
Autism spectrum 
disorder  
Open access 
 
http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/abide/ 
2. 
ADNI 
MRI 
Alzheimer’s 
disease 
Paid  
http://adni.loni.usc.edu/data-samples/access-
data/ 
3. 
BCDR 
Mammography 
Breast cancer 
Open access 
 
https://bcdr.eu/ 
4. 
CIVM 
3D-MRM 
Histology of the 
Embryonic and 
Neonatal Mouse 
Limited 
access 
http://www.civm.duhs.duke.edu/devatlas/ 
 
5. 
DDSM 
Mammography 
Breast cancer 
Open access 
http://marathon.csee.usf.edu/Mammography/
Database.html 
6. 
DermNet 
Photo 
dermatology 
A huge database 
of various skin 
diseases 
Limited 
access 
http://www.dermnet.com/ 
7. 
DICOM  
MRI, CT, etc. 
A variety of 
medical images, 
videos and signal 
files 
Open access 
https://www.dicomlibrary.com  
8. 
DRIVE 
2D color 
images of 
retina 
Retinal blood 
vessel 
segmentation to 
study diabetic 
retinopathy 
Open access 
 
http://www.isi.uu.nl/Research/Databases/DRI
VE/download.php 
 
9. 
IDA 
 
An online 
resource for 
neuroscience 
images 
Open access 
https://ida.loni.usc.edu/  
10. ISDIS 
Dermoscopy, 
telemedicine, 
spectroscopy 
etc. 
Skin disease 
Paid 
https://isdis.org/ 
11. MedPix 
Variety of 
imaging data  
Online database 
of medical 
images, teaching 
cases, and clinical 
topics 
Open access 
https://medpix.nlm.nih.gov  
12. NBIA 
CT, PT, MRI, 
etc. 
A database of the 
National Cancer 
Institute proving 
medical images of 
various conditions 
and anatomical 
sites. 
Limited/ 
open access 
https://imaging.nci.nih.gov/  
13. OASIS 
MRI and PET 
Normal aging or 
mild to moderate 
Alzheimer's 
Disease  
Open access 
 
http://www.oasis-brains.org/ 
14. TCIA 
Collection of 
MRI, CT etc. 
Multimodal image 
archive for 
various types of 
cancer  
Limited/ 
open access 
http://www.cancerimagingarchive.net/ 
15. TCGA 
Histopathology 
slide images 
Histopathology 
slide images from 
sample portions of 
various types of 
cancers 
Open 
https://cancergenome.nih.gov/  

21 
 
6. Discussion, opportunities and challenges 
Medical imaging and diagnostic techniques are one of the most widely used for early 
detection, diagnosis and treatment of complex diseases. After significant advancement in 
machine learning and deep learning (both supervised and unsupervised), there is a paradigm 
shift from the manual interpretation of medical images by human experts such as radiologists 
and physicians to an automated analysis and interpretation, called computer-assisted 
diagnosis (CAD). As unsupervised learning algorithms can derive insights directly from data, 
use them for data-driven decisions making, and are more robust, hence they can be utilized as 
the holy grail of learning and classification problems. Furthermore, these models are also 
utilized for other important tasks including compression, dimensionality reduction, denoising, 
super resolution and some degree of decision making.  
Unsupervised learning and CAD, both being in its infancy, researchers and practitioners have 
much opportunity in this area. Some of them are: (i) Allow us to perform exploratory analysis 
of data (ii) Allow to be used as preprocessing for supervised algorithm, when it is used to 
generate a new representation of data which ensure learning accuracy and reduces memory 
time overheads. (iii) Recent development of cloud computing, GPU-based computing, 
parallel computing and its cheaper cost allow big data processing, image analysis and execute 
complex deep learning algorithms very easily.  
Some of the challenges and research directions are: 
(i) Difficult to evaluate whether algorithm has learned anything useful: Due to lack of 
label in unsupervised learning, it is nearly impossible to quantify its accuracy. For instance, 
how can we access whether K-means algorithm found the right clusters? In this direction, 
there is a need to develop algorithms which can give an objective performance measure in 
unsupervised learning. 
(ii) Difficult to select right algorithm and hardware: Selection of right algorithm for a 
particular type of medical image analysis is not a trivial task because performances of the 
algorithm are highly dependent on the types of data. Similarly, hardware requirement also 
varies from problem to problem.  
(iii) Will unsupervised learning work for me? It is mostly asked question, but its answer 
totally depends on the problem at hand. In image segmentation problem, clustering algorithm 
will only work if the images do fit into naturals groups. 
(iv) Not a common choice for medical image analysis: Unsupervised learning is not a 
common choice for medical image analysis. However, from literature it is revealed that these 
(autoencoders and its variants, DBN, RBM, etc.) are mostly used to learn the hierarchy level 
of features for classification tasks. It is expected that unsupervised learning will play pivotal 
role in solving complex medical imaging problems which are not only scalable to large 
amount of unlabeled data, but also suitable for performing unsupervised and supervised 
learning tasks simultaneously (Yi et al., 2018). 

22 
 
(v) Development of patient-specific anatomical and organ model: Anatomical skeletons 
play crucial role in understanding diseases and pathology. Patient-specific anatomical model 
is frequently used for surgery and interventions. They help to plan procedure, perform 
measurement for device surging, and predict the outcome of post-surgery complexities. 
Hence, the algorithm needs to be developed to construct patient-specific anatomical and 
organ model from medical images. 
(vi) Heterogeneous image data: In the last two to three decades, more emphasis was given 
to well-defined medical image analysis applications, where developed algorithms were 
validated on well-defined types of images with well-defined acquisition protocol. The 
algorithms are required, which can work on more heterogeneous data. 
(vii) Semantic segmentation of images: Semantic segmentation is task of complete scene 
understanding, leading to knowledge inference from imagery. Scene understanding is a core 
of computer vision problems which has several applications, including human-computer 
interaction, self-driving vehicles, virtual reality, and medical image analysis. The semantic 
segment of medical images with acceptable accuracy is still challenging.  
(viii) Medical video transmission: Enabling 3D video in recently adopted telemedicine and 
U-healthcare applications result in more natural viewing conditions and better diagnosis. 
Also, remote surgery can be benefited from 3D video because of additional dimensions of 
depth. However, it is crucial to transmit data-hungry 3D medical video stream in real-time 
through limited bandwidth channels. Hence, efficient encoding and decoding techniques for 
3D video data transmission is required.  
(ix) Need extensive inter-organizational collaborations: Inter-professional and inter-
organizational collaboration is important for better functioning of the health care system, 
eliminating some of the pitfalls such as limited resources, lack of expertise, aging 
populations, and combat chronic diseases  (Karam et al., 2017). Medical image based CAD 
needs extensive inter-organizational collaborations among doctors, radiologists, medical 
image analysts, and computational data analysts.   
(x) Need to capitalize big medical imaging market: According to IHS Markit report 
(https://technology.ihs.com.), medical imaging market has total global revenue of $21.2 
billion in 2016, which is forecasted to touch $24.0 billion by 2020. According to WHO, 
global population will rise from 12% to 22% from 2015 to 2050. Population aging lead to 
increased rate of chronic diseases globally and hence there is a need to capitalize a big 
medical imaging market worldwide.  
(xi) Black-box and its acceptance by health professionals: Machine learning algorithms 
are boon which solves the problems earlier thought to be unsolvable, however, it suffers from 
being “black-box”, i.e., how output arrives from the model is very complicated to interpret. 
Particularly, deep learning models are almost non-interpretable and but still being used for 
complex medical image analysis. Hence, its acceptance by health professionals is still 
questionable.  

23 
 
(xii) Will technology replace radiologists? For the processing of medical images, deep 
learning algorithms help select and extract important features and construct new ones, leading 
to new representation of images, not seen before. For image interpretation side, deep learning 
helps identify, classify, quantify disease patterns, allow measure predictive targets, and make 
predictive models, and so on. So, will technology “replace radiologists”, or migrate to 
“virtual radiologist assistant” in near future? Hence, following slogan is quite relevant in this 
context: “Embrace it, it will make you stronger; reject it, it may make you irrelevant”. 
In a nutshell, unsupervised learning is very much open topic where researchers can make 
contributions by developing a new unsupervised method to train how network (e.g. Solve a 
puzzle, generate image patterns, image patch comparison, etc.) and re-thinking of creating a 
great unsupervised feature representation, (e.g. What is the object and what is the 
background?), nearly analogous to the human visual system.   
7. Conclusion 
Medical imaging is one of the important techniques for early detection, diagnosis and 
treatment of complex diseases. Interpretation of medical images is usually performed by 
human experts such as radiologists and physicians. After the success of machine learning 
techniques, including deep learning, availability of cheap computing infrastructure through 
cloud computing, there has been a paradigm shift in the field of computer-assisted diagnosis 
(CAD). Both supervised and unsupervised machine learning approaches are widely applied in 
medical image analysis, each of them with their own pros and cons. Due to the fact that 
human supervisions are not always available or inadequate or biased, therefore, unsupervised 
learning algorithms, including its deep architecture, give a big hope with lots of advantages.  
Unsupervised learning algorithms derive insights directly from data, and use them for data-
driven decisions making. Unsupervised models are more robust and they can be utilized as 
the holy grail of learning and classification problems. These models are also used for other 
tasks including compression, dimensionality reduction, denoising, super resolution and some 
degree of decision making. Therefore, it is better to construct a model without knowing what 
tasks will be at hand and we would use representation (or model) for. In a nutshell, we can 
think of unsupervised learning as preparation (preprocessing) step for supervised learning 
tasks, where unsupervised learning of representation may allow better generalization of a 
classifier. 
Acknowledgements 
Authors would like to thank Ms. Sahar Qazi, Ms. Almas Jabeen, and Mr. Nisar Wani for 
necessary support. 
Conflict of Interest Statement 
Authors declare that there is no any conflict of interest in the publication of this manuscript. 
 
 

24 
 
References 
Aghdam, M. A., Sharifi, A., & Pedram, M. M. (2018). Combination of rs-fMRI and sMRI Data to Discriminate 
Autism Spectrum Disorders in Young Children Using Deep Belief Network. Journal of digital imaging, 
1-9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10278-018-0093-8  
Avendi, M. R., Kheradvar, A., &Jafarkhani, H. (2017). Automatic segmentation of the right ventricle from 
cardiac MRI using a learning-based approach. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 78(6), 2439–2448. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.26631  
Azizi, S., Imani, F., Ghavidel, S., Tahmasebi, A., Kwak, J.T., Xu, S., Turkbey, B., Choyke, P., Pinto, P., Wood, 
B., Mousavi, P., Abolmaesumi, P. (2016). Detection of prostate cancer using temporal sequences of 
ultrasound data: a large clinical feasibility study. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 11 (6), 947–956. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11548-016-1395-2  
Ballard, D. H. (1987). Modular Learning in Neural Networks. In AAAI (pp. 279-284). 
Bengio Y, Courville A, Vincent P. (2013).  Representation learning: a review and new perspectives. IEEE Trans 
Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 35:1798–828. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50  
Bengio, Y. (2009). Learning Deep Architectures for AI. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2(1), 1-
127. https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000006  
Bengio, Y., Lamblin, P. , Popovici, D. , Larochelle, H.  (2007). Greedy layer-wise training of deep networks. In: 
Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 153–160. 
Benou, A., Veksler, R. , Friedman, A. , Raviv, T.R. (2016). De-noising of contrast-enhanced MRI sequences by 
an ensemble of expert deep neural networks. In: Deep Learning and Data Labeling for Medical 
Applications (pp. 95-110). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46976-8_11  
Bi, L., Feng, D., Kim, J. (2018). Dual-Path Adversarial Learning for Fully Convolutional Network (FCN)-Based 
Medical Image Segmentation, Visual Computer, 34(6-8), 1043-1052. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-
018-1519-5  
Bi, L., Kim, J., Kumar, A., Feng, D., Fulham, M. (2017). Synthesis of positron emission tomography (PET) 
images via multi-channel generative adversarial networks (GANs). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
10555, pp. 43-51. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67564-0_5  
Bishop CM. (2006). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics), 1st edn. 
Springer, New York.. 
Bourlard H, Kamp Y. (1988). Auto-association by multilayer perceptrons and singular value decomposition. 
Biological Cybernetics, 59, 291–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00332918  
Brosch, T., Tam, R. (2013). Manifold learning of brain MRIs by deep learning. In: Proceedings of the Medical 
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interven- tion. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8150, 
pp. 633–640. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 642-40763-5_78  
Brosch, T., Yoo, Y., Li, D. K. B., Traboulsee, A., Tam, R. (2014). Modeling the variability in brain morphology 
and lesion distribution in multiple sclerosis by deep learning. In: Med Image Comput Comput Assist 
Interv. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8674 (pp. 462–469).  
Cai, Y., Landis, M., Laidley, D. T., Kornecki, A., Lum, A., Li, S. (2016b). Multi-modal vertebrae recognition 
using transformed deep convolution network. Comput Med Imaging Graph, 51, 11–19. 
Canas, K., Liu, X., Ubiera, B., Liu, Y. (2018). Scalable biomedical image synthesis with GAN. ACM 
International Conference Proceeding Series, art. no. a95. https://doi.org/10.1145/3219104.3229261  
Cao, P., Liu, X., Bao, H., Yang, J., & Zhao, D. (2015). Restricted Boltzmann machines based oversampling and 
semi-supervised learning for false positive reduction in breast CAD. Bio-medical materials and 
engineering, 26(s1), S1541-S1547. https://doi.org/10.3233/BME-151453  
Cao, Y., Steffey, S., He, J., Xiao, D., Tao, C., Chen, P., Müller, H. (2014). Medical image retrieval: A 
multimodal approach. Cancer Informatics, 125-136. https://doi.org/10.4137/CIN.S14053  

25 
 
Carneiro, G., Nascimento, J.C. (2013). Combining multiple dynamic models and deep learning architectures for 
tracking the left ventricle endocardium in ultrasound data. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 35, 
2592–2607. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI. 2013.96  
Carneiro, G., Nascimento, J.C., Freitas, A. (2012). The segmentation of the left ven- tricle of the heart from 
ultrasound data using deep learning architectures and derivative-based search methods. IEEE 
Transactions on Image Processing, 21(3), 968–982. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2011.2169273   
Chan, T. H., Jia, K., Gao, S., Lu, J., Zeng, Z., & Ma, Y. (2015). PCANet: A simple deep learning baseline for 
image 
classification?. 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Image 
Processing, 
24(12), 
5017-5032. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2015.2475625  
Cheng J-Z, Ni D, Chou Y-H, et al. (2016). Computer-aided diagnosis with deep learning architecture: 
applications to breast lesions in US images and pulmonary nodules in CT scans. Scientific Reports, 6, 
24454. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep24454  
Cheng, Li Zhang & Yefeng Zheng. (2018). Deep similarity learning for multimodal medical images, Computer 
Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering: Imaging & Visualization, 6:3, 248-252. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21681163.2015.1135299  
Dinggang S. & Wu, Guorong& Suk, Heung-Il. (2017). Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis. Annual 
review of biomedical engineering, 19. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-bioeng-071516-044442  
Drineas, Petros & Frieze, Alan & Kannan, Ravindran & Vempala, Santosh & Vinay, V. (1999). Clustering in 
Large Graphs and Matrices. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete 
Algorithms(pp. 291-299). 
Fischer, P. Pohl, T. Faranesh, A., Maier, A. and Hornegger, J. (2017). Unsupervised Learning  for Robust 
Respiratory Signal Estimation From X-Ray Fluoroscopy, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 36(4), 
865-877. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2016.2609888  
Gallinari, Y. LeCun, S. Thiria, and F. Fogelman-Soulie. Memoires associatives distribuees. In Proceedings of 
COGNITIVA 87, Paris, La Villette, 1987 
Goodfellow, I. J., Mirza, M., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. (2013b). Multi-prediction deep Boltzmann 
machines. In NIPS’2013. 
Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, SherjilOzair, Aaron Courville, 
and YoshuaBengio. (2014). Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems. Curran Associates, 2672–2680. 
Goodfellow, Quoc Le, Andrew Saxe, and Andrew Ng. (2009). Measuring invariances in deep networks. In 
Yoshua Bengio, Dale Schuurmans, Christopher Williams, John Lafferty, and Aron Culotta, editors, 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22  NIPS’09 , pages 646–654. 
Guo, X., Liu, X., Zhu, E., & Yin, J. (2017, November). Deep clustering with convolutional autoencoders. 
In International Conference on Neural Information Processing (pp. 373-382). Springer, Cham. 
Guo, Y., Wu, G., Commander, L. A., Szary, S., Jewells, V., Lin, W., & Shent, D. (2014). Segmenting 
hippocampus from infant brains by sparse patch matching with deep-learned features. Medical image 
computing and computer-assisted intervention : MICCAI ... International Conference on Medical Image 
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, 17(Pt 2), 308-15. 
Hatipoglu, N., &Bilgin, G. (2017). Cell segmentation in histopathological images with deep learning algorithms 
by utilizing spatial relationships. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 55(10), 1829–1848. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11517-017-1630-1  
Hinton G, Dayan P, Frey B,NealR. (1995).  he “wake–sleep” algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. 
Science, 268:1158–61. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7761831  
Hinton GE, Salakhutdinov RR. (2006). Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science 
313:504–7. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1127647  
Hinton, G. , 2010. A practical guide to training restricted boltzmann machines. Momentum 9 (1), 926 

26 
 
Hinton, G.E., Osindero, S., Teh, Y.-W., 2006a. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural Comput. 
18, 1527–1554. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2006.18.7.1527  
Hosseini-Asl, E., Gimel’farb, G., El-Baz, A. (2016). Alzheimer’s disease diagnostics by a deeply supervised 
adaptable 3D convolutional network. arxiv: 1607.00556 . 
Hou, L., Nguyen, V., Kanevsky, A. B., Samaras, D., Kurc, T. M., Zhao, T., ... & Saltz, J. H. (2019). Sparse 
Autoencoder for Unsupervised Nucleus Detection and Representation in Histopathology Images. Pattern 
Recognition, 86: 188-200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2018.09.007  
Hu, Y., Gibson, E., Lee, L.-L., Xie, W., Barratt, D.C., Vercauteren, T., Noble, J.A. (2017). Freehand ultrasound 
image simulation with spatially-conditioned generative adversarial networks. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 10555 (pp. 105-115). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67564-0_11  
Huang, H., Hu, X., Han, J., Lv, J., Liu, N., Guo, L., Liu, T., 2016. Latent source mining in FMRI data via deep 
neural network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, pp. 638–
641. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2016.7493348   
Huang, H., Hu, X., Zhao, Y., Makkie, M., Dong, Q., Zhao, S., ... & Liu, T. (2018). Modeling task fMRI data via 
deep convolutional autoencoder. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 37(7), 1551-1561. 
Iqbal, T., Ali, H. Generative Adversarial Network for Medical Images (MI-GAN) (2018) Journal of Medical 
Systems, 42 (11), art. no. 231. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-018-1072-9  
Jabeen, A., Ahmad, N., & Raza, K. (2018). Machine Learning-Based State-of-the-Art Methods for the 
Classification of RNA-Seq Data. In Classification in BioApps (pp. 133-172). Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65981-7_6  
Jain K. (2010). Data clustering: 50 years beyond K-means. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 31, 8 (June 2010), 651-
666. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2009.09.011  
Jain K., Karthik Nandakumar, and Abhishek Nagar. (2008). Biometric Template Security. EURASIP Journal on 
Advances 
in 
Signal 
Processing 
Volume 
2008, 
Article 
ID 
579416, 
17 
pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2008/579416  
Jain K., Murty, M & J. Flynn, Patrick. (1999). Data clustering: a review. ACM Comput Surv. ACM Comput. 
Surv.. 31. 264-323. https://doi.org/10.1145/331499.331504  
Janowczyk, A. , Basavanhally, A. , Madabhushi, A. (2017). Stain normalization using sparse autoencoders 
(STANOSA): application to digital pathology. Comput. Med. Imaging Graph 57, 50–61. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compmedimag.2016.05.003  
Jaumard-Hakoun, A., Xu, K., Roussel-Ragot, P., Dreyfus, G., Denby, B. (2016). Tongue contour extraction 
from ultrasound images based on deep neural network. arxiv: 1605.05912 . 
Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu and Yann LeCun, (2017). Energy-Based Generative Adversarial Networks. ICLR 
2017, arXiv:1609.03126v4 
Kallenberg, M., Petersen, K., Nielsen, M., Ng, A., Diao, P., Igel, C., Vachon, C., Hol- land, K., Karssemeijer, 
N., Lillholm, M., 2016. Unsupervised deep learning ap- plied to breast density segmentation and 
mammographic 
risk 
scoring. 
IEEE 
Trans. 
Med. 
Imaging 
35, 
1322–1331. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2016.2532122  
Karam, M., Brault, I., Van Durme, T., & Macq, J. (2017). Comparing interprofessional and interorganizational 
collaboration in healthcare: A systematic review of the qualitative research. International journal of 
nursing studies. 
Karim Armanious, Chenming Yang, Marc Fischer, Thomas K¨ustner, Konstantin Nikolaou, Sergios Gatidis, and 
Bin Yang. MedGAN: Medical Image Translation using GANs. Journal Of Latex Class Files, Vol. 14, No. 
8, August 2015. 
Kingma and Max Welling. 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes. CoRRabs/1312.6114 (2013). Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114  

27 
 
Li, F., Qiao, H., Zhang, B., Xi, X. (2017). Discriminatively boosted image clustering with fully convolutional 
auto-encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07980. 
Litjens, G., Kooi, T., Bejnordi, B. E., Setio, A. A. A., Ciompi, F., Ghafoorian, M., ... & Sánchez, C. I. (2017). A 
survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image analysis, 42, 60-88.. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2017.07.005  
Liu S, Liu S, Cai W, et al. Early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease with deep learning. In: International 
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, Beijing, China 2014, 1015–18. 
Makhzani, A. & Frey, B. (2013). k-Sparse Autoencoders. arxiv: preprint: 1312.5663. 
Mansoor, A., Cerrolaza, J., Idrees, R., Biggs, E., Alsharid, M., Avery, R., Linguraru, M.G., 2016. Deep learning 
guided partitioned shape model for anterior visual path- way segmentation. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 
35 (8), 1856–1865. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2016.2535222   
Mathews, S. M., Kambhamettu, C., & Barner, K. E. (2018). A novel application of deep learning for single-lead 
ECG 
classification. Computers 
in 
biology 
and 
medicine, 
99:53-62. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2018.05.013  
Minh H.Q., Niyogi P., Yao Y. (2006). Mercer’s  heorem, Feature Maps, and Smoothing. In: Lugosi G., Simon 
H.U. (eds) Learning Theory. COLT 2006. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 4005. Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/11776420_14  
Miotto R, Li L, Kidd BA, et al. (2016). Deep patient: an unsupervised representation to predict the future of 
patients 
from 
the 
electronic 
health 
records. 
Scientific 
Reports, 
6:26094. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep26094  
Nahid, A.-A., Mikaelian, A., Kong, Y. (2018). Histopathological breast-image classification with restricted 
Boltzmann machine along with backpropagation. Biomedical Research, 29(10), 2068-2077. 
https://doi.org/10.4066/biomedicalresearch.29-17-3903  
Ng, A. (2013). Sparse autoencoder lecture notes. Source: web.stanford.edu/class/cs294a/sparseAutoencoder.pdf 
Ngo, T.A., Lu, Z., Carneiro, G. (2017). Combining deep learning and level set for the au- tomated segmentation 
of the left ventricle of the heart from cardiac cine mag- netic resonance. Med. Image Anal. 35, 159–171. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2016.05.009  
Ortiz, A., Munilla, J., Górriz, J.M., Ramírez, J. (2016). Ensembles of deep learning architectures for the early 
diagnosis of the Alzheimer’s disease. International Journal of Neural Systems, 26(7), 1650025. 
https://doi.org/10.1142/S0129065716500258  
Partaourides, Harris; Chatzis, Sotirios P. (2017). Asymmetric deep generative models. Neurocomputing, 241, 
90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2017.02.028   
Payan, A., Montana, G. (2015). Predicting Alzheimer’s disease: a neuroimaging study with 3D convolutional 
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02506. 
Pereira, S., Meier, R., McKinley, R., Wiest, R., Alves, V., Silva, C. A., & Reyes, M. (2018). Enhancing 
interpretability of automatically extracted machine learning features: application to a RBM-Random 
Forest 
system 
on 
brain 
lesion 
segmentation. Medical 
image 
analysis, 44, 
228-244. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2017.12.009  
Pinaya, W.H.L., Gadelha, A., Doyle, O.M., Noto, C., Zugman, A., Cordeiro, Q., Jack- owski, A.P., Bressan, 
R.A., Sato, J.R., 2016. Using deep belief network modelling to characterize differences in brain 
morphometry in schizophrenia. Nat. Sci. Rep. 6, 38897. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38897  
Plis, S.M., Hjelm, D.R., Salakhutdinov, R., Allen, E.A., Bockholt, H.J., Long, J.D., John- son, H.J., Paulsen, 
J.S., Turner, J.A., Calhoun, V.D., 2014. Deep learning for neu- roimaging: a validation study. Front. 
Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00229  
Rifai, Pascal Vincent, Xavier Muller, Xavier Glorot, and YoshuaBengio. 2011. Contractive auto-encoders: 
explicit invariance during feature extraction. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on 

28 
 
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'11), LiseGetoor and Tobias Scheffer (Eds.). 
Omnipress, USA, 833-840. 
Salakhutdinov R, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2009. Deep Boltzmann machines. In Artificial Intelligence and 
Statistics.PMLR, 448–455. 
Salakhutdinov R, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2012. An efficient learning procedure for deep Boltzmann machines. 
Neural Computation 24, 8 (2012), 1967–2006. 
Salakhutdinov R. 2015. Learning deep generative models. Annu. Rev. Stat. Appl. 2:361–85 
Shi, J. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and S. Ying, "Histopathological Image Classification WithColor Pattern Random 
Binary Hashing-Based PCANet and Matrix-Form Classifier," in IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health 
Informatics, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1327-1337, Sept. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2016.2602823  
Shin, H. C., Orton, M. R., Collins, D. J., Doran, S. J., & Leach, M. O. (2013). Stacked autoencoders for 
unsupervised feature learning and multiple organ detection in a pilot study using 4D patient data. IEEE 
transactions 
on 
pattern 
analysis 
and 
machine 
intelligence, 35(8), 
1930-1943. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2012.277  
Su H., Xing F., Kong X., Xie Y., Zhang S., Yang L. (2018). Robust Cell Detection and Segmentation in 
Histopathological Images Using Sparse Reconstruction and Stacked Denoising Autoencoders. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, 9351. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_46   
Suk, H. I., Lee, S. W., Shen, D., (2013a). Latent feature representation with stacked auto-encoder for AD/MCI 
diagnosis. Brain structure & function, 220(2), 841-59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-013-0687-3  
Suk, H.-I., Lee, S.-W., Shen, D. (2014). Hierarchical feature representation and multi- modal fusion with deep 
learning for AD/MCI diagnosis. Neuroimage 101, 569–582. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.06.077  
Suk, H.-I., Shen, D. (2013). Deep learning-based feature representation for AD/MCI classification. In: 
Proceedings of the Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. In: Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, 8150 (pp. 583–590). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40763-5_72  
Suk, H.-I., Wee, C.-Y., Lee, S.-W., Shen, D. (2016). State-space model with deep learn- ing for functional 
dynamics 
estimation 
in 
resting-state 
FMRI. 
Neuroimage, 
129, 
292–307. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.01.005  
Van Tulder, G., & de Bruijne, M. (2016). Combining generative and discriminative representation learning for 
lung CT analysis with convolutional restricted boltzmann machines. IEEE transactions on medical 
imaging, 35(5), 1262-1272. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2016.2526687  
Vincent P, Larochelle H, Lajoie I, (2010) Stacked denoising autoencoders: learning useful representations in a 
deep network with a local denoising criterion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11, 3371-3408 
Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.A. Manzagol. Extracting and composing robust features with 
denoising autoencoders. In W.W. Cohen, A. McCallum, and S.T. Roweis, editors, Proceedings of the 
Twenty-fifth International Conference on Machine Learning  ICML’08 , pages 1096–1103. ACM, 2008. 
Wani, N., & Raza, K. (2018). Multiple Kernel-Learning Approach for Medical Image Analysis. In Soft 
Computing Based Medical Image Analysis (pp. 31-47). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813087-
2.00002-6  
Wu, J., Ruan, S., Mazur, T.R., Daniel, N., Lashmett, H., Ochoa, L., Zoberi, I., Lian, C., Gach, H.M., Mutic, S., 
Thomas, M., Anastasio, M.A., Li, H. (2018). Heart motion tracking on cine MRI based on a deep 
Boltzmann machine-driven level set method. In Proceedings of International Symposium on Biomedical 
Imaging (pp. 1153-1156). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2018.8363775  
Xu, J., Xiang, L., Liu, Q., Gilmore, H., Wu, J., Tang, J., Madabhushi, A. (2016). Stacked sparse autoencoder 
(SSAE) for nuclei detection on breast cancer histopathology images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 35, 119–
130. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2015.2458702  

29 
 
Yi, W., Tsang, K. K., Lam, S. K., Bai, X., Crowell, J. A., & Flores, E. A. (2018). Biological plausibility and 
stochasticity in scalable VO2 active memristor neurons. Nature Communications, 9(1), 4661. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07052-w  
Yoo, Y., Brosch, T., Traboulsee, A., Li, D. K., & Tam, R. (2014). Deep learning of image features from 
unlabeled data for multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation. In International Workshop on Machine 
Learning in Medical Imaging (pp. 117-124). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10581-
9_15  
Zabalza, J., Ren, J., Zheng, J., Zhao, H., Qing, C., Yang, Z., ... & Marshall, S. (2016). Novel segmented stacked 
autoencoder for effective dimensionality reduction and feature extraction in hyperspectral 
imaging. Neurocomputing, 185, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2015.11.044  
Zhang, Q., Xiao, Y., Dai, W., Suo, J., Wang, C., Shi, J., Zheng, H., (2016a). Deep learning based classification 
of 
breast 
tumors 
with 
shear-wave 
elastography. 
Ultrasonics 
72, 
150–157. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultras.2016.08.004  
Zhao, Wei & Jia, Zuchen & Wei, Xiaosong & Wang, Hai. (2018). An FPGA Implementation of a Convolutional 
Auto-Encoder. Applied Sciences. 8. 504. https://doi.org/10.3390/app8040504  
Zhu, Y., Wang, L., Liu, M., Qian, C., Yousuf, A., Oto, A., Shen, D. (2017). MRI Based prostate cancer 
detection with high-level representation and hierarchical classification. Med. Phys. 44 (3), 1028–1039. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.12116  
 
